--- START BNS ---
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023
NO. 45 OF 2023
[25th December, 2023.]
An Act to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and for
matters connected therewithor incidentalthereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) ThisAct maybe called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come intoforce on such date as the Central Government may, bynotification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates maybe appointed for different provisions
of this Sanhita.
Short title,
commencement
and
application.

 

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
25th December, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25122023-250883

(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for
every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within
India.
(4) Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an
offence committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this
Sanhita for any act committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been
committed within India.
(5) The provisions of this Sanhita shall also apply to any offence committed by—
(a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
(b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;
(c) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting
a computer resource located in India.
Explanation.—In this section, the word “offence” includes every act committed outside
India which, if committed in India, would be punishable under this Sanhita.
Illustration.
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in any place without and beyond India.
He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.
(6) Nothing in this Sanhita shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny
and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of India
or the provisions of any special or local law.
2. In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(1) “act” denotes as well a series of acts as a single act;
(2) “animal” means any living creature, other than a human being;
(3) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years;
(4) “counterfeit”.––A person is said to “counterfeit” who causes one thing to
resemble another thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception,
or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practised.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be
exact.
Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing,
and the resemblance is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so causing the one thing to
resemble the other thing intended by means of that resemblance to practise deception
or knew it to be likely that deception would thereby be practised;
(5) “Court” means a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a
body of Judges which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when such
Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially;
(6) “death” means the death of a human being unless the contrary appears from
the context;
(7) “dishonestly” means doing anything with the intention of causing wrongful
gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person;
(8) “document” means any matter expressed or described upon any substance
by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, and includes
electronic and digital record, intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence
of that matter.
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the
letters, figures or marks are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be
used in a Court or not.
Definitions.

Illustrations.
(a)Awriting expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence
of the contract, is a document.
(b) A cheque upon a banker is a document.
(c)A power-of-attorney is a document.
(d)Amap or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as evidence,
is a document.
(e) A writing containing directions or instructions is a document.
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as
explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such
letters, figures or marks within the meaning of this section, although the same may not
be actually expressed.
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The
meaning of the endorsement, as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be
paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document, and shall be construed in the same
manner as if the words “pay to the holder” or words to that effect had been written
over the signature;
(9) “fraudulently” means doing anything with the intention to defraud but not
otherwise;
(10) “gender”.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person,
whether male, female or transgender.
Explanation.–– “transgender” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k)
of section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019;
(11) “good faith”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith” which
is done or believed without due care and attention;
(12) “Government” means the Central Government or a State Government;
(13) “harbour” includes supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money,
clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any
means, whether of the same kind as those enumerated in this clause or not, to evade
apprehension;
(14) “injury” means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body,
mind, reputation or property;
(15) “illegal” and “legally bound to do”.—The word “illegal” is applicable to
everything which is an offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes
ground for a civil action; and a person is said to be “legally bound to do” whatever it
is illegal in him to omit;
(16) “Judge” means a person who is officially designated as a Judge and includes
a person,––
(i) who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or
criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not appealed against,
would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority,
would be definitive; or
(ii) who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered
by law to give such a judgment.
40 of 2019.

Illustration.
A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has
power to sentence to fine or imprisonment, with or without appeal, is a Judge;
(17) “life” means the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the
context;
(18) “local law” means a law applicable only to a particular part of India;
(19) “man” means male human being of any age;
(20) “month” and “year”.––Wherever the word “month” or the word “year” is
used, it is to be understood that the month or the year is to be reckoned according to
the Gregorian calendar;
(21) “movable property” includes property of every description, except land
and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is attached
to the earth;
(22) “number”.—Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing
the singular number include the plural number, and words importing the plural number
include the singular number;
(23) “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and
any declaration required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or to
be used for the purpose of proof, whether in a Court or not;
(24) “offence”.—Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in
sub-clauses (a) and (b), the word “offence” means a thing made punishable by this
Sanhita, but––
(a) in Chapter III and in the following sections, namely, sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of section 8, sections 9, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 119,
120, 123, sub-sections (7) and (8) of section 127, 222, 230, 231, 240, 248, 250,
251, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, sub-sections (6) and (7) of section 308 and
sub-section (2) of section 330, the word “offence” means a thing punishable
under this Sanhita, or under any special law or local law; and
(b) in sub-section (1) of section 189, sections 211, 212, 238, 239, 249, 253
and sub-section (1) of section 329, the word “offence” shall have the same
meaning when the act punishable under the special law or local law is punishable
under such law with imprisonment for a term of six months or more, whether
with or without fine;
(25) “omission” denotes as well as a series of omissions as a single omission;
(26) “person” includes any company or association or body of persons, whether
incorporated or not;
(27) “public” includes any class of the public or any community;
(28) “public servant” means a person falling under any of the descriptions,
namely:—
(a) every commissioned officer in theArmy, Navy orAir Force;
(b) every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge,
whether by himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory
functions;
(c) every officer of a Court including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner
whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or
fact, or to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose

of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or
to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially
authorised by a Court to perform any of such duties;
(d) every assessor or member of a panchayat assisting a Court or public
servant;
(e) every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been
referred for decision or report by any Court, or by any other competent public
authority;
(f) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered
to place or keep any person in confinement;
(g) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to
prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice,
or to protect the public health, safety or convenience;
(h) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey,
assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to execute any
revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting the
pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any
document relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent
the infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the
Government;
(i) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax
for any secular common purpose of any village, town or district, or to make,
authenticate or keep any document for the ascertaining of the rights of the
people of any village, town or district;
(j) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered
to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election
or part of an election;
(k) every person—
(i) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or
commission for the performance of any public duty by the Government;
(ii) in the service or pay of a local authority as defined in clause (31)
of section 3 of the General ClausesAct, 1897, a corporation established by
or under a Central or State Act or a Government company as defined in
clause (45) of section 2 of the CompaniesAct, 2013.
Explanation.—
(a) persons falling under any of the descriptions made in this clause are
public servants, whether appointed by the Government or not;
(b) every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public
servant, whatever legal defect there may be in his right to hold that situation is
a public servant;
(c) “election” means an election for the purpose of selecting members of
any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of whatever character, the
method of selection to which is by, or under any law for the time being in force.
Illustration.
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant;
10 of 1897.
18 of 2013.

(29) “reason to believe”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe” a thing,
if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise;
(30) “special law” means a law applicable to a particular subject;
(31) “valuable security” means a document which is, or purports to be, a
document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted,
extinguished or released, or whereby any person acknowledges that he lies under legal
liability, or has not a certain legal right.
Illustration.
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this
endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any person who may become the
lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a “valuable security”;
(32) “vessel” means anything made for the conveyance by water of human
beings or of property;
(33) “voluntarily”.—A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily” when he
causes it by means whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of
employing those means, he knew or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it.
Illustration.
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of
facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have
intended to cause death; and may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act;
yet, if he knew that he was likely to cause death, he has caused death voluntarily;
(34) “will” means any testamentary document;
(35) “woman” means a female human being of any age;
(36) “wrongful gain” means gain by unlawful means of property to which the
person gaining is not legally entitled;
(37) “wrongful loss” means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the
person losing it is legally entitled;
(38) “gaining wrongfully” and “losing wrongfully”.—A person is said to gain
wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires
wrongfully.Aperson is said to lose wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out
of any property, as well as when such person is wrongfully deprived of property; and
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this Sanhita but defined in
the InformationTechnologyAct, 2000 and the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,2023
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita.
3. (1) Throughout this Sanhita every definition of an offence, every penal provision,
and every Illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood
subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled “General Exceptions”, though
those exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or Illustration.
Illustrations.
(a) The sections in this Sanhita, which contain definitions of offences, do not express
that a child under seven years of age cannot commit such offences; but the definitions are to
be understood subject to the general exception which provides that nothing shall be an
offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.
(b)A, a police officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder. Here
A is not guilty of the offence of wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend
Z, and therefore the case falls within the general exception which provides that “nothing is
an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it”.
General
explanations.
21 of 2000.

(2) Every expression which is explained in any Part of this Sanhita, is used in every Part
of this Sanhita in conformity with the explanation.
(3) When property is in the possession of a person’s spouse, clerk or servant, on
account of that person, it is in that person’s possession within the meaning of this Sanhita.
Explanation.—A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the capacity
of a clerk or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sub-section.
(4) In every Part of this Sanhita, except where a contrary intention appears from the
context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.
(5) When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common
intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done
by him alone.
(6) Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal
knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the
act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were
done by him alone with that knowledge or intention.
(7) Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an
act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the causing of that effect
partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence.
Illustration.
Aintentionally causes Z’s death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and partly
by beating Z. A has committed murder.
(8) When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally
cooperates in the commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either singly or
jointly with any other person, commits that offence.
Illustrations.
(a)Aand B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small doses
of poison.Aand B administer the poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z.
Z dies from the effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and B
intentionally cooperate in the commission of murder and as each of them does an act by
which the death is caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively
for six hours at a time.Aand B, intending to cause Z’s death, knowingly cooperate in causing
that effect by illegally omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food
supplied to them for that purpose. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder
of Z.
(c)A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner.A, intending to cause Z’s death, illegally
omits to supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the
starvation is not sufficient to cause his death.A is dismissed from his office, and B succeeds
him. B, without collusion or cooperation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food,
knowing that he is likely thereby to cause Z’s death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder,
but, as A did not cooperate with B.A is guilty only of an attempt to commit murder.
(9) Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal
act, they may be guilty of different offences by means of that act.
Illustration.
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z would
be only culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending

to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here,
thoughA and B are both engaged in causing Z’s death, B is guilty of murder, and Ais guilty
only of culpable homicide.
CHAPTERII
OF PUNISHMENTS
4. The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita
are—
(a) Death;
(b) Imprisonment for life;
(c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
(d) Forfeiture of property;
(e) Fine;
(f) Community Service.
5. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute
any punishment under this Sanhita to any other punishment in accordance with section 474
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section the expression “appropriate
Government” means,––
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends,
the Central Government; and
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends,
the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced.
6. In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life shall be
reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years unless otherwise provided.
7. In every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be
of either description, it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to
direct in the sentence that such imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such
imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous
and the rest simple.
8. (1) Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to
which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive.
(2) In every case of an offence––
(a) punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is
sentenced to a fine, whether with or without imprisonment;
(b) punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in which the offender
is sentenced to a fine,
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sentence
that, in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain
term, in which imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may
have been sentenced or to which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.
Punishments.
Commutation
of sentence.
Fractions of
terms of
punishment.
Sentence may
be (in certain
cases of
imprisonment)
wholly or
partly rigorous
or simple.
Amount of
fine, liability
in default of
payment of
fine, etc.

(3) The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of
payment of a fine shall not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the
maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.
(4) The imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine or in
default of community service may be of any description to which the offender might have
been sentenced for the offence.
(5) If the offence is punishable with fine or community service, the imprisonment
which the Court imposes in default of payment of the fine or in default of community service
shall be simple, and the term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in
default of payment of fine or in default of community service, shall not exceed,—
(a) two months when the amount of the fine does not exceed five thousand
rupees;
(b) four months when the amount of the fine does not exceed ten thousand
rupees; and
(c) one year in any other case.
(6) (a) The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall
terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law;
(b) If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment,
such a proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in
default of payment is not less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the
imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration.
A is sentenced to a fine of one thousand rupees and to four months’ imprisonment in
default of payment. Here, if seven hundred and fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied
before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the
first month has expired. If seven hundred and fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the
expiration of the first month, or at any later time whileAcontinues in imprisonment,Awill be
immediately discharged. If five hundred rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the
expiration of two months of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the two
months are completed. If five hundred rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of
thosetwomonths,oratanylatertimewhileAcontinuesin imprisonment, Awillbeimmediately
discharged.
(7) The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within
six years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable
to imprisonment for a longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration
of that period; and the death of the offender does not discharge from the liability any
property which would, after his death, be legally liable for his debts.
9. (1) Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is
itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with the punishment of more than one of
such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.
(2) Where—
(a) anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any
law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished; or
Limit of
punishment of
offence made
up of several
offences.

(b) several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence,
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries
him could award for any one of such offences.
Illustrations.
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of
voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which
make up the whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be
imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only to one punishment for the
whole beating.
(b) But, if, whileAis beating Z, Y interferes, andAintentionally strikesY, here, as the
blow given to Y is no part of the act wherebyAvoluntarily causes hurt to Z,Ais liable to one
punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the blow given to Y.
10. In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several
offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is
guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is
provided if the same punishment is not provided for all.
11. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this Sanhita the
Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence,
order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according
to the following scale, namely:—
(a) a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed
six months;
(b) a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six
months and shall not exceed one year;
(c) a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed
one year.
12. In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case
exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of
not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three
months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not
less duration than such periods.
13. Whoever, having been convicted by a Court in India, of an offence punishable
under Chapter X or Chapter XVII of this Sanhita with imprisonment of either description for
a term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of
those Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be subject for every such
subsequent offence to imprisonment for life, or to imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years.
CHAPTERIII
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
14. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be,
bound by law to do it.
Illustrations.
(a)A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity with the
commands of the law. Ahas committed no offence.
Punishment of
person guilty
of one of
several
offences,
judgment
stating that it
is doubtful of
which.
Limit of
solitary
confinement.
Enhanced
punishment
for certain
offences after
previous
conviction.
Act done by a
person bound,
or by mistake
of fact
believing
himself bound,
by law.
Solitary
confinement.

(b) A, an officer of a Court, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y, and, after due
enquiry, believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no offence.
15. Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the
exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him by law.
16. Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment or
order of, a Court; if done whilst such judgment or order remains in force, is an offence,
notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or order,
provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction.
17. Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who
by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes
himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
Illustration.
Asees Z commit what appears toAto be a murder.A, in the exercise, to the best of his
judgment exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending
murderers in the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities. A has
committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z was acting in self-defence.
18. Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any
criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful
means and with proper care and caution.
Illustration.
Ais at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by. Here,
if there was no want of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an
offence.
19. Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that
it is likely to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in
good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation.—It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented
or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the
act with the knowledge that it was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations.
(a) A, the captain of a vessel, suddenly and without any fault or negligence on his
part, finds himself in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably
run down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the course
of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C
with only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, ifAalters his course
without any intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding
the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run
down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found
as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in
incurring the risk of running down the boat C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from
spreading. He does this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or property.
Here, if it be found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to
excuse A’s act, A is not guilty of the offence.
Act of Judge
when acting
judicially.
Act done
pursuant to
judgment or
order of
Court.
Act done by a
person justified,
or by mistake of
fact believing
himself justified,
by law.
Accident in
doing a lawful
act.
Act likely to
cause harm,
but done
without
criminal
intent, and to
prevent other
harm.

20. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age.
21. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under
twelve years of age, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of
the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion.
22. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is
doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
23. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by
reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is
either wrong, or contrary to law; provided that the thing which intoxicated him was
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.
24. In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge
or intent, a person who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with
as if he had the same knowledge as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless
the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
25. Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not
known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any
harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen
years of age, who has given consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by
reason of any harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such
person who has consented to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the
consent of each to suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused
without foul play; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z,Acommits no offence.
26. Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm
which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely
to cause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a
consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration.
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z, who
suffers under the painful complaint, but not intending to cause Z’s death, and intending, in
good faith, Z’s benefit, performs that operation on Z, with Z’s consent. Ahas committed no
offence.
27. Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years
of age, or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent, either express or implied, of the
guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any
harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be
likely to cause to that person:
Provided that this exception shall not extend to––
(a) the intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
Act of a child
above seven
and under
twelve years
of age of
immature
understanding.
Act of a
person of
unsound mind.
Act of a person
incapable of
judgment by
reason of
intoxication
caused against
his will.
Offence
requiring a
particular
intent or
knowledge
committed by
one who is
intoxicated.
Act not
intended and
not known to
be likely to
cause death or
grievous hurt,
done by
consent.
Act not
intended to
cause death,
done by
consent in
good faith for
person's
benefit.
Act done in
good faith for
benefit of
child or
person of
unsound mind,
by, or by
consent of
guardian.
Act of a child
under seven
years of age.

death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the
curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous
hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of
any grievous disease or infirmity;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not
extend.
Illustration.
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut for
the stone by a surgeon knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the child’s death,
but not intending to cause the child’s death. A is within the exception, in as much as his
object was the cure of the child.
28. A consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this Sanhita,––
(a) if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception
of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the
consent was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or
(b) if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he
gives his consent; or
(c) unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a
person who is under twelve years of age.
29. The exceptions in sections 25, 26 and 27 do not extend to acts which are offences
independently of any harm which they may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to
be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.
Illustration.
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
woman) is an offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to
the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm”; and the consent of the
woman or of her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.
30. Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for
whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person’s consent, if the circumstances
are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is incapable
of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful charge of him from whom it
is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:
Provided that this exception shall not extend to––
(a) the intentional causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;
(b) the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the
curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
(c) the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any
purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt;
(d) the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not
extend.
Illustrations.
(1) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible.A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to
Consent
known to be
given under
fear or
misconception.
Exclusion of
acts which are
offences
independently
of harm
caused.
Act done in
good faith for
benefit of a
person
without
consent.

be trepanned. A, not intending Z’s death, but in good faith, for Z’s benefit, performs the
trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.
(2) Z is carried off by a tiger.Afires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may
kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit.A’s bullet gives Z a
mortal wound.A has committed no offence.
(3)A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an
operation be immediately performed. There is no time to apply to the child’s guardian. A
performs the operation in spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the
child’s benefit. A has committed no offence.
(4) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket.A
drops the child from the house top, knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but
not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. Here, even if
the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence.
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of
sections 26, 27 and this section.
31. No communication made in good faith is an offence by reason of any harm to the
person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration.
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live.
The patient dies in consequence of the shock.A has committed no offence, though he knew
it to be likely that the communication might cause the patient’s death.
32. Except murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, nothing is an
offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by threats, which, at the time of
doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise
be the consequence:
Provided that the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable
apprehension of harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by
which he became subject to such constraint.
Explanation 1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being
beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this
exception, on the ground of his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that
is an offence by law.
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant
death, to do a thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his
tools and to force the door of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the
benefit of this exception.
33. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause, or
that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Of right of private defence
34. Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
35. Every person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in section 37, to
defend—
(a) his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting
the human body;
(b) the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other
Communication
made in good
faith.
Act to which a
person is
compelled by
threats.
Act causing
slight harm.
Things done
in private
defence.
Right of
private
defence of
body and of
property.

person, against any act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery,
mischief or criminal trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief
or criminal trespass.
36. When an act, which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by
reason of the youth, the want of maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the
intoxication of the person doing that act, or by reason of any misconception on the part of
that person, every person has the same right of private defence against that act which he
would have if the act were that offence.
Illustrations.
(a) Z, a person of unsound mind, attempts to killA; Z is guilty of no offence. ButAhas
the same right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith,
taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception,
commits no offence. ButA has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would
have if Z were not acting under that misconception.
37. (1) There is no right of private defence,––
(a) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death
or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good
faith under colour of his office, though that act, may not be strictly justifiable by law;
(b) against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death
or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public
servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that direction may not
be strictly justifiable by law;
(c) in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection of the public
authorities.
(2) The right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than
it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act
done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason
to believe, that the person doing the act is such public servant.
Explanation 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act
done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has
reason to believe, that the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such
person states the authority under which he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he
produces such authority, if demanded.
38. The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions specified in
section 37, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the
offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter
enumerated, namely:—
(a) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will
otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
(b) such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous
hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such assault;
(c) an assault with the intention of committing rape;
(d) an assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
(e) an assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
Right of
private
defence
against act of
a person of
unsound mind,
etc.
Acts against
which there is
no right of
private
defence.
When right of
private
defence of
body extends
to causing
death.

(f) an assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under
circumstances which may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to
have recourse to the public authorities for his release;
(g) an act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer
acid which may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise
be the consequence of such act.
39. If the offence be not of any of the descriptions specified in section 38, the right of
private defence of the body does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the
assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary
causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.
40. The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable
apprehension of danger to the body arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence
though the offence may not have been committed; and it continues as long as such
apprehension of danger to the body continues.
41. The right of private defence of property extends, under the restrictions specified in
section 37, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the
offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise
of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:—
(a) robbery;
(b) house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise;
(c) mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any building, tent
or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place for
the custody of property;
(d) theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may
reasonably cause apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence,
if such right of private defence is not exercised.
42. If the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions
the exercise of the right of private defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any
of the descriptions specified in section 41, that right does not extend to the voluntary
causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions specified in section 37, to the
voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other than death.
43. The right of private defence of property,––
(a) commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property
commences;
(b) against theft continues till the offender has effected his retreat with the
property or either the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property
has been recovered;
(c) against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to
cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant
death or of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues;
(d) against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender
continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief;
(e) against house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise continues as long as
the house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues.
44. If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably
causes the apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually
When such
right extends
to causing any
harm other
than death.
Commencement
and
continuance of
right of private
defence of
body.
When right of
private
defence of
property
extends to
causing death.
When such
right extends
to causing any
harm other
than death.
Commencement
and
continuance
of right of
private
defence of
property.
Right of private
defence against
deadly assault
when there is
risk of harm to
innocent person.

exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence
extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration.
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise his
right of private defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming
young children who are mingled with the mob.Acommits no offence if by so firing he harms
any of the children.
CHAPTERIV
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
of abetment
45. A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
(a) instigates any person to do that thing; or
(b) engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
(c) intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment
of a material fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts
to cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration.
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court to apprehend Z. B, knowing
that fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully represents toAthat C is Z, and thereby intentionally
causes A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.
Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act,
does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the
commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
46. A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of
committing an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation 1.—The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an
offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2.—To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act
abetted should be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be
caused.
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit
murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recovers
from the wound.Ais guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law
of committing an offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as
that of the abettor, or any guilty intention or knowledge.
Abetment of a
thing.
Abettor.

Illustrations.
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a person of unsound mind to commit an
act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an
offence, and having the same intention asA. HereA, whether the act be committed or not, is
guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of age,
to do an act which causes Z’s death. B, in consequence of the abetment, does the act in the
absence of A and thereby causes Z’s death. Here, though B was not capable by law of
committing an offence, Ais liable to be punished in the same manner as if B had been capable
by law of committing an offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore subject to
the punishment of death.
(c)Ainstigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of his unsoundness
of mind, being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong
or contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence ofA’s instigation. B has committed
no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is
liable to the punishment provided for that offence.
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property belonging
to Z out of Z’s possession. Ainduces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the
property out of Z’s possession, in good faith, believing it to beA’s property. B, acting under
this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is
guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft.
Explanation 4.—The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such
an abetment is also an offence.
Illustration.
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and
C commits that offence in consequence of B’s instigation. B is liable to be punished for his
offence with the punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B to commit the offence, A is
also liable to the same punishment.
Explanation 5.—It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by
conspiracy that the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is
sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed.
Illustration.
Aconcerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed thatAshall administer the poison.
B then explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but
without mentioningA’s name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and delivers it to
B for the purpose of its being used in the manner explained.Aadministers the poison; Z dies
in consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged
in the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been murdered. C has therefore committed the
offence defined in this section and is liable to the punishment for murder.
47. A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Sanhita who, in India, abets
the commission of any act without and beyond India which would constitute an offence if
committed in India.
Illustration.
A, in India, instigates B, a foreigner in country X, to commit a murder in that country,
A is guilty of abetting murder.
48. A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Sanhita who, without and
beyond India, abets the commission of any act in India which would constitute an offence if
committed in India.
Abetment in
India of
offences
outside India.
Abetment
outside India
for offence in
India.

Illustration.
A, in country X, instigates B, to commit a murder in India,Ais guilty of abetting murder.
49. Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of
the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Sanhita for the punishment of such
abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment,
when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or
with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
Illustrations.
(a) Ainstigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation, commits
that offence. A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B.
(b) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the
poison and delivers it to B in order that he may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the
conspiracy, administers the poison to Z in A’s absence and thereby causes Z’s death. Here
B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the
punishment for murder.
50. Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the
act with a different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the
punishment provided for the offence which would have been committed if the act had been
done with the intention or knowledge of the abettor and with no other.
51. When an act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act
done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had directly abetted it:
Provided that the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was
committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the
conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
Illustrations.
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that
purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the
food of Y, which is by the side of that of Z. Here, if the child was acting under the influence
of A’s instigation, and the act done was under the circumstances a probable consequence of
the abetment,Ais liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z’s house, B sets fire to the house and at the same time
commits theft of property there.A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is not
guilty of abetting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence
of the burning.
(c)Ainstigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the purpose of
robbery, and provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C break into the house, and
being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable
consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishment provided for murder.
52. If the act for which the abettor is liable under section 51 is committed in addition to
the act abetted, and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each
of the offences.
Punishment of
abetment if
act abetted is
committed in
consequence
and where no
express
provision is
made for its
punishment.
Punishment of
abetment if
person abetted
does act with
different
intention
from that of
abettor.
Liability of
abettor when
one act
abetted and
different act
done.
Abettor when
liable to
cumulative
punishment
for act abetted
and for act
done.

Illustration.
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in consequence,
resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the
officer executing the distress.As B has committed both the offence of resisting the distress,
and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these
offences; and, ifA knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the
distress, A will also be liable to punishment for each of the offences.
53. When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a
particular effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment,
causes a different effect from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect
caused, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had abetted the act with the
intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the act abetted was likely to cause
that effect.
Illustration.
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instigation,
causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence. Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt
abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the punishment provided
for murder.
54. Whenever any person, who is absent would be liable to be punished as an abettor,
is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in consequence of the
abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed such act or offence.
55. Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment,
and no express provision is made under this Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if any act for which the abettor is liable in consequence
of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he
would have been subject to the punishment of death or imprisonment for life.Therefore, Ais
liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and if
any hurt be done to Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for
a term which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine.
56. Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence be
not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made under this
Sanhita for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or
with both; and if the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to
prevent the commission of such offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of
any description provided for that offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the
longest term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or
with both.
Illustrations.
(a)Ainstigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false evidence,Ahas
nevertheless committed the offence defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly.
Liability of
abettor for an
effect caused
by act abetted
different from
that intended
by abettor.
Abettor
present when
offence is
committed.
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with death or
imprisonment
for life.
Abetment of
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment.

(b) A, a police officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of
robbery. Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest
term of imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(c) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police officer, whose duty it is to
prevent that offence. Here, though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the
longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine.
57. Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any
number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine.
Illustration.
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten
members to meet at a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an
adverse sect, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
58. Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life,
voluntarily conceals by any act or omission, or by the use of encryption or any other
information hiding tool, the existence of a design to commit such offence or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,––
(a) if that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years; or
(b) if the offence be not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for
a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the Magistrate
that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a place in an opposite direction, and thereby
misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity
is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punishable under this section.
59. Whoever, being a public servant, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public
servant to prevent, voluntarily conceals, by any act or omission or by the use of encryption
or any other information hiding tool, the existence of a design to commit such offence, or
makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,––
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term of
such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; or
(b) if the offence be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years; or
(c) if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of
the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence,
or with both.
Illustration.
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit
robbery which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery,
omits to give such information, with intent to so facilitate the commission of that offence.
Abetting
commission of
offence by
public or by
more than ten
persons.
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with death or
imprisonment
for life.
Public servant
concealing
design to
commit
offence which
it is his duty
to prevent.

Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B’s design, and is liable to
punishment according to the provision of this section.
60. Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment, voluntarily conceals,
by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design shall,––
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth; and
(b) if the offence be not committed, to one-eighth,
of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or
with both.
Of criminal conspiracy
61. (1) When two or more persons agree with the common object to do, or cause to be
done––
(a) an illegal act; or
(b) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated
a criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to
a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties
to such agreement in pursuance thereof.
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such
agreement, or is merely incidental to that object.
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy,––
(a) to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous
imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is
made in this Sanhita for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same
manner as if he had abetted such offence;
(b) other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six
months, or with fine or with both.
Of attempt
62. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Sanhita with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in
such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express
provision is made by this Sanhita for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or
with both.
Illustrations.
(a)Amakes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds after so
opening the box, that there is no jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of
theft, and therefore is guilty under this section.
(b)Amakes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into Z’s pocket.A
fails in the attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his pocket.Ais guilty under this
section.
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with
imprisonment.
Criminal
conspiracy.
Punishment for
attempting to
commit
offences
punishable with
imprisonment
for life or
other
imprisonment.

CHAPTERV
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD
Of sexual offences
63. Aman is said to commit “rape” if he—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of
a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis,
into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any
other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into
the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with
him or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do
so with him or any other person,
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:—
(i) against her will;
(ii) without her consent;
(iii) with her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt;
(iv) with her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that
her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married;
(v) with her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through
another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand
the nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent;
(vi) with or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age;
(vii) when she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia
majora.
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman
by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates
willingness to participate in the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall
not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception 1.––A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.––Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under eighteen years of age, is not rape.
64. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2), commits rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape,—
Rape.
Punishment
for rape.

(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is
appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a woman in such police officer’s custody or in the custody of a
police officer subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant’s
custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central
Government or a State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution, commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place
or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a
woman in that hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or
authority towards the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(i) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
(j) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on
such woman; or
(k) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or
(l) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or
endangers the life of a woman; or
(m) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “armed forces” means the naval, army and air forces and includes any member
of the Armed Forces constituted under any law for the time being in force, including
the paramilitary forces and any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central
Government or the State Government;
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of
any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of
persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) “police officer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression
“police” under the PoliceAct, 1861;
(d) “women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether called an
orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widow’s home or an
institution called by any other name, which is established and maintained for the
reception and care of women or children.
5 of 1861.

65. (1) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
(2) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under twelve years of age shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life, and with fine or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
66. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
of section 64 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death
of the woman or causes the woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life, or with death.
67. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether
under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned
in clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
68. Whoever, being—
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women’s or children’s
institution; or
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital,
abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his
custody or under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with him,
such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years, but
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of section 63.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanation 1 to section 63 shall
also be applicable.
Explanation 3.—“Superintendent”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of
custody or a women’s or children’s institution, includes a person holding any other office in
such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any
authority or control over its inmates.
Punishment
for rape in
certain cases.
Punishment for
causing death
or resulting in
persistent
vegetative
state of victim.
Sexual
intercourse by
husband upon
his wife during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
a person in
authority.

Explanation 4.—The expressions “hospital” and “women’s or children’s institution”
shall respectively have the same meanings as in clauses (b) and (d) of the Explanation to
sub-section (2) of section 64.
69. Whoever, by deceitful means or by making promise to marry to a woman without
any intention of fulfilling the same, has sexual intercourse with her, such sexual intercourse
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—“deceitful means” shall include inducement for, or false promise of
employment or promotion, or marrying by suppressing identity.
70. (1) Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life which shall
mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
(2) Where a woman under eighteen years of age is raped by one or more persons
constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons
shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, and with fine, or with death:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
71. Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under
section 64 or section 65 or section 66 or section 70 and is subsequently convicted of an
offence punishable under any of the said sections shall be punished with imprisonment for
life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, or with
death.
72. (1) Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter which may make known
the identity of any person against whom an offence under section 64 or section 65 or
section 66 or section 67 or section 68 or section 69 or section 70 or section 71 is alleged or
found to have been committed (hereafter in this section referred to as the victim) shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years
and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or publication of the name or
any matter which may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication
is—
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer-in-charge of the police station
or the police officer making the investigation into such offence acting in good faith for
the purposes of such investigation; or
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; or
(c) where the victim is dead or a child or of unsound mind, by, or with the
authorisation in writing of, the next of kin of the victim:
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next of kin to anybody other
than the chairman or the secretary, by whatever name called, of any recognised welfare
institution or organisation.
Sexual
intercourse
by employing
deceitful
means, etc.
Gang rape.
Punishment
for repeat
offenders.
Disclosure of
identity of
victim of
certain
offences, etc.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution
or organisation” means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf
by the Central Government or the State Government.
73. Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any proceeding before a
Court with respect to an offence referred to in section 72 without the previous permission of
such Court shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—The printing or publication of the judgment of any High Court or the
Supreme Court does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.
Of criminal force and assault against woman
74. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
75. (1)Aman committing any of the following acts:—
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual
overtures; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
(2)Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii)
of sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3)Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both.
76. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the
intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
77. Whoever watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private act in
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either
by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates
such image shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “private act” includes an act of
watching carried out in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to
provide privacy and where the victim’s genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered
only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is
not of a kind ordinarily done in public.
Assault or use
of criminal
force to
woman with
intent to
outrage her
modesty.
Sexual
harassment.
Assault or use
of criminal
force to
woman with
intent to
disrobe.
Voyeurism.
Printing or
publishing any
matter
relating to
Court
proceedings
without
permission.

Explanation 2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act,
but not to their dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated,
such dissemination shall be considered an offence under this section.
78. (1) Any man who—
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster
personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, e-mail or any other form of
electronic communication,
commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it
proves that—
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man
accused of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and
detection of crime by the State; or
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement
imposed by any person under any law; or
(iii) in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine; and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
79. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object in any form, intending that such word or sound
shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon
the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, and also with fine.
Of offences relating to marriage
80. (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is
shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband
or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death
shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused
her death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry ProhibitionAct, 1961.
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.
81. Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to
believe that she is lawfully married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him
in that belief, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
82. (1) Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception.—This sub-section does not extend to any person whose marriage with
such husband or wife has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, nor to
any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or wife, if such
husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent
Stalking.
Word, gesture
or act
intended to
insult modesty
of a woman.
Dowry death.
Cohabitation
caused by man
deceitfully
inducing
belief of lawful
marriage.
Marrying
again during
lifetime of
husband or
wife.
28 of 1961.

from such person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such
person as being alive within that time provided the person contracting such subsequent
marriage shall, before such marriage takes place, inform the person with whom such marriage
is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her knowledge.
(2) Whoever commits the offence under sub-section (1) having concealed from the
person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact of the former marriage,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
83. Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony
of being married, knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
84. Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of any other man, with intent that she may have illicit
intercourse with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any such woman, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
85. Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
86. For the purposes of section 85, “cruelty” means—
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing
her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
such demand.
87. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or
knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in
order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that
she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Sanhita or of abuse of
authority or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with
intent that she may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse with another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid.
Of causing miscarriage, etc.
88. Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if such miscarriage
be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both; and, if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—Awoman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this
section.
Marriage
ceremony
fraudulently
gone through
without lawful
marriage.
Enticing or
taking away or
detaining with
criminal
intent a
married
woman.
Husband or
relative of
husband of a
woman
subjecting her
to cruelty.
Kidnapping,
abducting or
inducing
woman to
compel her
marriage, etc.
Causing
miscarriage.
Cruelty
defined.

89. Whoever commits the offence under section 88 without the consent of the woman,
whether the woman is quick with child or not, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
90. (1) Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any
act which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Where the act referred to in sub-section (1) is done without the consent of the
woman, shall be punishable either with imprisonment for life, or with the punishment specified
in said sub-section.
Explanation.—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that
the act is likely to cause death.
91. Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by
such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if
such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the mother, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
or with fine, or with both.
92. Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death
he would be guilty of culpable homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick
unborn child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant woman, does an act
which, if it caused the death of the woman, would amount to culpable homicide. The woman
is injured, but does not die; but the death of an unborn quick child with which she is
pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Of offences against child
93. Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or
having the care of such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention
of wholly abandoning such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for
murder or culpable homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence of the
exposure.
94. Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child
whether such child die before or after or during its birth, intentionally conceals or endeavours
to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
95. Whoever hires, employs or engages any child to commit an offence shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to ten years, and with fine; and if the offence be committed shall also
be punished with the punishment provided for that offence as if the offence has been
committed by such person himself.
Explanation.—Hiring, employing, engaging or using a child for sexual exploitation or
pornography is covered within the meaning of this section.
96. Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any child to go from any place or to
do any act with intent that such child may be, or knowing that it is likely that such child will
be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
97. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention
of taking dishonestly any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Death caused
by act done
with intent to
cause
miscarriage.
Act done with
intent to
prevent child
being born
alive or to
cause to die
after birth.
Causing death
of quick
unborn child
by act
amounting to
culpable
homicide.
Exposure and
abandonment
of child under
twelve years
of age, by
parent or
person having
care of it.
Concealment
of birth by
secret disposal
of dead body.
Hiring,
employing or
engaging a
child to
commit an
offence.
Procuration of
child.
Kidnapping or
abducting child
under ten years
of age with
intent to steal
from its
person.
Causing
miscarriage
without woman's
consent.

98. Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any child with intent that such
child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse
with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such
child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or
otherwise disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the
person so disposing of such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have
disposed of her with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse” means sexual
intercourse between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though
not amounting to a marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community
to which they belong or, where they belong to different communities, of both such
communities, as constituting between them a quasi-marital relation.
99. Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any child with intent that
such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit
intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be
likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than
seven years but which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years
shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female
with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—“Illicit intercourse” has the same meaning as in section 98.
CHAPTERVI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
100. Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death,
or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable
homicide.
Illustrations.
(a)Alays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with
the knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm,
treads on it, falls in and is killed.A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely to cause Z’s death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z.
Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(c)A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, who is behind a bush;
A not knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not
guilty of culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause death by doing an act
that he knew was likely to cause death.
Explanation 1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring
under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other,
shall be deemed to have caused his death.
Selling child for
purposes of
prostitution,
etc.
Buying child
for purposes of
prostitution,
etc.
Culpable
homicide.

Explanation 2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such
bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper
remedies and skilful treatment the death might have been prevented.
Explanation 3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother’s womb is not
homicide. But it may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any
part of that child has been brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been
completely born.
101. Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder,––
(a) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
death; or
(b) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person
to whom the harm is caused; or
(c) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient
in the ordinary course of nature to cause death; or
(d) if the person committing the act by which the death is caused, knows that it
is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring
the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits
murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause
his death, strikes him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of
the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not have been sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound state of health. But if A,
not knowing that Z is labouring under any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the
ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he may
intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or
such bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c)A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of
a man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder,
although he may not have intended to cause Z’s death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one
of them.Ais guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any
particular individual.
Exception 1.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the
power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who
gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident:
Provided that the provocation is not,––
(a) sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or
doing harm to any person;
(b) given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the
lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant;
(c) given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent
the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact.
Murder.

Illustrations.
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally
killsY, Z’s child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was not given by the child, and
the death of the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused by the
provocation.
(b)Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A.A, on this provocation, fires a pistol at
Y, neither intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight.
Akills Z. HereAhas not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide.
(c)A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. Ais excited to sudden and violent passion by
the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given by a thing
done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does not believe a
word of A’s deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by
these words, and kills Z. This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z’s nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays
hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in
consequence, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was giving by a thing
done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage.A, a bystander, intending
to take advantage of B’s rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B’s hand for that
purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, butA
is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the exercise in good
faith of the right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by
law and causes the death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence
without premeditation, and without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for
the purpose of such defence.
Illustration.
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A
draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other
means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed
murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant
or aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers
given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be
lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duty as such public servant and without
ill-will towards the person whose death is caused.
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation
in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender’s
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or
commits the first assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused,
being above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own
consent.
Illustration.
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a child to commit suicide. Here, on account of
Z’s youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted
murder.

102. If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause
death, commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by
the offender is of the description of which it would have been if he had caused the death of
the person whose death he intended or knew himself to be likely to cause.
103. (1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any
other similar ground each member of such group shall be punished with death or with
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
104.Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life, commits murder, shall be
punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
105. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the
act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge that
it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death.
106. (1) Whoever causes death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not
amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if such act is
done by a registered medical practitioner while performing medical procedure, he shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, “registered medical practitioner”
means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification recognised under the
National Medical CommissionAct, 2019 and whose name has been entered in the National
Medical Register or a State Medical Register under that Act.
(2) Whoever causes death of any person by rash and negligent driving of vehicle not
amounting to culpable homicide, and escapes without reporting it to a police officer or a
Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
of a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
107. If any child, any person of unsound mind, any delirious person or any person in
a state of intoxication, commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall
be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
108. If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
109. (1) Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender
shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to such punishment as is hereinbefore
mentioned.
Culpable
homicide by
causing death
of person other
than person
whose death
was intended.
Punishment
for murder.
Punishment
for murder by
life-convict.
Punishment
for culpable
homicide not
amounting to
murder.
Causing death
by negligence.
Abetment of
suicide of child
or person of
unsound mind.
Abetment of
suicide.
Attempt to
murder.
30 of 2019.

(2) When any person offending under sub-section (1) is under sentence of imprisonment
for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death
ensued, A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.
(b)A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a
desert place. A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of the
child does not ensue.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the
offence.Afires the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by
such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the latter part of
sub-section (1).
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with
food which remains in A’s keeping; A has not yet committed the offence defined in this
section. A places the food on Z’s table or delivers it to Z’s servants to place it on Z’s table.A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
110. Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide
not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any
person by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances that
if he thereby caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to
murder. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
111. (1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, vehicle
theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cyber-crimes, trafficking
of persons, drugs, weapons or illicit goods or services, human trafficking for prostitution or
ransom, by any person or a group of persons acting in concert, singly or jointly, either as a
member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence,
threat of violence, intimidation, coercion, or by any other unlawful means to obtain direct or
indirect material benefit including a financial benefit, shall constitute organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,––
(i) “organised crime syndicate” means a group of two or more persons who,
acting either singly or jointly, as a syndicate or gang indulge in any continuing
unlawful activity;
(ii) “continuing unlawful activity” means an activity prohibited by law which is
a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment of three years or more, undertaken
by any person, either singly or jointly, as a member of an organised crime syndicate or
Attempt to
commit
culpable
homicide.
Organised
crime.

on behalf of such syndicate in respect of which more than one charge-sheets have
been filed before a competent Court within the preceding period of ten years and that
Court has taken cognizance of such offence, and includes economic offence;
(iii) “economic offence” includes criminal breach of trust, forgery, counterfeiting
of currency-notes, bank-notes and Government stamps, hawala transaction,
mass-marketing fraud or running any scheme to defraud several persons or doing any
act in any manner with a view to defraud any bank or financial institution or any other
institution or organisation for obtaining monetary benefits in any form.
(2) Whoever commits organised crime shall,—
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with
death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than ten lakh rupees;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(3) Whoever abets, attempts, conspires or knowingly facilitates the commission of an
organised crime, or otherwise engages in any act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than five lakh rupees.
(4) Any person who is a member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees.
(5) Whoever, intentionally, harbours or conceals any person who has committed the
offence of an organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever possesses any property derived or obtained from the commission of an
organised crime or proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through
the organised crime, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees.
(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an organised crime syndicate is, or at any
time has been in possession of movable or immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily
account for, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to imprisonment for ten years and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
112. (1) Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, either singly or jointly, commits
any act of theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorised selling of tickets, unauthorised betting
or gambling, selling of public examination question papers or any other similar criminal act,
is said to commit petty organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section "theft" includes trick theft, theft
from vehicle, dwelling house or business premises, cargo theft, pick pocketing, theft through
card skimming, shoplifting and theft ofAutomated Teller Machine.
(2) Whoever commits any petty organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Petty
organised
crime.

113. (1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten or likely to threaten the
unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic security of India or with the intent to
strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or
in any foreign country,––
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substance or inflammable
substance or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other
chemicals or by any other substance (whether biological, radioactive, nuclear or
otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever nature to cause
or likely to cause,—
(i) death of, or injury to, any person or persons; or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
community in India or in any foreign country; or
(iv) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or
smuggling or circulation of counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any
other material; or
(v) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country
used or intended to be used for the defence of India or in connection with any
other purposes of the Government of India, any State Government or any of
their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or attempts
to do so or causes death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death of any
public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatening to kill or injure such
person or does any other act in order to compel the Government of India, any
State Government or the Government of a foreign country or an international or
inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do or abstain from doing any act,
commit a terrorist act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorities or any other
functionary notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government as public
functionary;
(b) “counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit currency as may be
declared after examination by an authorised or notified forensic authority that such
currency imitates or compromises with the key security features of Indian currency.
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with
death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites,
directly or knowingly facilitates the commission of a terrorist act or any act preparatory to
the commission of a terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Terrorist act.

(4) Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps for imparting
training in terrorist act, or recruits or causes to be recruited any person or persons for
commission of a terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(5)Any person who is a member of an organisation which is involved in terrorist act,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or conceal any
person knowing that such person has committed a terrorist act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(7) Whoever knowingly possesses any property derived or obtained from commission
of any terrorist act or acquired through the commission of any terrorist act shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the officer not
below the rank of Superintendent of Police shall decide whether to register the case under
this section or under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Of hurt
114. Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause
hurt.
115. (1) Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any
person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”.
(2)Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122 voluntarily
causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
116. The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous”, namely:––
(a) Emasculation;
(b) Permanent privation of the sight of either eye;
(c) Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear;
(d) Privation of any member or joint;
(e) Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint;
(f) Permanent disfiguration of the head or face;
(g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth;
(h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the
space of fifteen days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.
117. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or
knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”.
Hurt.
Voluntarily
causing hurt.
Grievous hurt.
Voluntarily
causing
grievous hurt.
37 of 1967.

Explanation.—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he
both causes grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt.
But he is said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely
to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he actually causes grievous hurt of another kind.
Illustration.
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z’s face, gives
Z a blow which does not permanently disfigure Z’s face, but which causes Z to suffer severe
bodily pain for the space of fifteen days. A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt.
(2)Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily
causes grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) and in the course of such
commission causes any hurt to a person which causes that person to be in permanent
disability or in persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life.
(4) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert, causes grievous hurt to a
person on the ground of his race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal
belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be guilty of the offence
of causing grievous hurt, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
118. (1) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122,
voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any
instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire
or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by
means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to
the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2)Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily
causes grievous hurt by any means referred to in sub–section (1), shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
119. (1)Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer,
or from any person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything which is
illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
120. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer
or from any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may
lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the
sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any
property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which
may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Voluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to extort
confession, or
to compel
restoration of
property.
Voluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
by dangerous
weapons or
means.
Voluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to extort
property, or to
constrain to an
illegal act.

Illustrations.
(a) A, a police officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he committed a
crime. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, a police officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where certain stolen
property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures Z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of
revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
121. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public servant in the
discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or
any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant or in consequence
of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful discharge of his duty
as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in
the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that
person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant or in
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful discharge
of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
122. (1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other than the
person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he
neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt to any person other
than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—This section is subject to the same proviso as Exception 1 of
section 101.
123. Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any
stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to
such person, or with intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing
it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
124. (1) Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or
maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous
hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using any other
means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such
injury or hurt or causes a person to be in a permanent vegetative state shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
Voluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
to deter public
servant from
his duty.
Voluntarily
causing hurt or
grievous hurt
on
provocation.
Causing hurt
by means of
poison, etc.,
with intent to
commit an
offence.
Voluntarily
causing
grievous hurt
by use of acid,
etc.

Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the
victim.
(2) Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to administer
acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of causing
permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability
or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “acid” includes any substance
which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily
injury leading to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, permanent or partial damage or
deformity or permanent vegetative state shall not be required to be irreversible.
125. Whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to two thousand five
hundred rupees, or with both, but—
(a) where hurt is caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where grievous hurt is caused, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement
126. (1) Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from
proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to
restrain that person.
Exception.—The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in
good faith believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the
meaning of this section.
Illustration.
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass,A not believing in good faith that
he has a right to stop the path. Z is thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully
restrains Z.
(2) Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
127. (1) Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to prevent that
person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to confine”
that person.
Illustrations.
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in. Z is thus prevented from
proceeding in any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall.Awrongfully confines Z.
(b)Aplaces men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire
at Z if Z attempts to leave the building.A wrongfully confines Z.
(2) Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
Act
endangering
life or personal
safety of
others.
Wrongful
restraint.
Wrongful
confinement.

(3) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for three days, or more, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for ten days or more, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(5) Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the
liberation of that person has been duly issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment
to which he may be liable under any other section of this Chapter and shall also be liable to
fine.
(6) Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as to indicate an intention
that the confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested in the
person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may not
be known to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years in addition to any other punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful
confinement and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined, or from any person interested in the person confined, any property or
valuable security or of constraining the person confined or any person interested in such
person to do anything illegal or to give any information which may facilitate the commission
of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(8) Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the
person confined or any person interested in the person confined any confession or any
information which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose
of constraining the person confined or any person interested in the person confined to
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim
or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal force and assault
128. A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of
motion, or cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that
other’s body, or with anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so
situated that such contact affects that other’s sense of feeling:
Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of
motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the following
three ways, namely:––
(a) by his own bodily power;
(b) by disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or
cessation of motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of
any other person;
(c) by inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move.
Force.

129. Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person’s consent,
in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to
the person to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other.
Illustrations.
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus
intentionally causes the boat to drift down the stream. HereAintentionally causes motion to
Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the motion is produced
without any other action on any person’s part. A has therefore intentionally used force to Z;
and if he has done so without Z’s consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or
intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of force will cause injury, fear or annoyance
to Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes them to quicken
their pace. HereAhas caused change of motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their
motion.Ahas therefore used force to Z; and ifAhas done this without Z’s consent, intending
or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z,Ahas used criminal
force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the
palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by his own
bodily power. Ahas therefore used force to Z; and as Ahas acted thus intentionally, without
Z’s consent, in order to the commission of an offence. A has used criminal force to Z.
(d)A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. HereA has by his own bodily power
moved his own person so as to bring it into contact with Z. He has therefore intentionally
used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be
likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus
brought into contact with Z, or with Z’s clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will
strike water and dash up the water against Z’s clothes or something carried by Z. Here, if the
throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any substance to come into contact with
Z, or Z’s clothes, A has used force to Z, and if he did so without Z’s consent, intending
thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(f)Aintentionally pulls up a woman’s veil. HereAintentionally uses force to her, and if
he does so without her consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
injure, frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A
intentionally by his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as brings that
water into contact with Z, or with other water so situated that such contact must affect Z’s
sense of feeling; A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done this
without Z’s consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury,
fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force.
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to cause
injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
130. Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be
likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he
who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to
commit an assault.
Criminal force.
Assault.

Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a
person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those
gestures or preparations amount to an assault.
Illustrations.
(a)Ashakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause
Z to believe that A is about to strike Z. A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to be
likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A
has committed an assault upon Z.
(c)Atakes up a stick, saying to Z, “I will give you a beating”. Here, though the words
used byAcould in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied
by any other circumstances, might not amount to an assault, the gesture explained by the
words may amount to an assault.
131. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave
and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation 1.—Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for
an offence under this section,—
(a) if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an
excuse for the offence; or
(b) if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a
public servant, in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant; or
(c) if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right
of private defence.
Explanation 2.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate
the offence, is a question of fact.
132. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in
the execution of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that
person from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything
done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
133. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to
dishonour that person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
134. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit
theft on any property which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
135. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully
to confine that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both.
Punishment
for assault or
criminal force
otherwise than
on grave
provocation.
Assault or
criminal force
to deter public
servant from
discharge of
his duty.
Assault or
criminal force
with intent to
dishonour
person,
otherwise than
on grave
provocation.
Assault or
criminal force
in attempt to
commit theft
of property
carried by a
person.
Assault or
criminal force
in attempt to
wrongfully
confine a
person.

136. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person on grave and sudden
provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
Explanation.—This section is subject to the same Explanation as section 131.
Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour
137. (1) Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from
lawful guardianship––
(a) whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of India without the consent
of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that
person, is said to kidnap that person from India;
(b) whoever takes or entices any child or any person of unsound mind, out of the
keeping of the lawful guardian of such child or person of unsound mind, without the
consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap such child or person from lawful
guardianship.
Explanation.––The words “lawful guardian” in this clause include any person
lawfully entrusted with the care or custody of such child or other person.
Exception.—This clause does not extend to the act of any person who in good
faith believes himself to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith
believes himself to be entitled to the lawful custody of such child, unless such act is
committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose.
(2) Whoever kidnaps any person from India or from lawful guardianship shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
138. Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go
from any place, is said to abduct that person.
139. (1) Whoever kidnaps any child or, not being the lawful guardian of such child,
obtains the custody of the child, in order that such child may be employed or used for the
purposes of begging shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever maims any child in order that such child may be employed or used for the
purposes of begging shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than
twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder
of that person’s natural life, and with fine.
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a child employs or uses such
child for the purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he
kidnapped or otherwise obtained the custody of such child in order that such child might be
employed or used for the purposes of begging.
(4) In this section “begging” means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the pretence of
singing, dancing, fortune telling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise;
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving
alms;
Assault or
criminal force
on grave
provocation.
Kidnapping.
Abduction.
Kidnapping or
maiming a
child for
purposes of
begging.

(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any
sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or
of an animal;
(iv) using such child as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms.
140. (1) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be
murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a)Akidnaps Z from India, intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacrificed
to an idol. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b)Aforcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(2) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention after such
kidnapping or abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by his
conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put to death or
hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in order to compel the Government or any
foreign State or international inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do or
abstain from doing any act or to pay a ransom, shall be punishable with death, or imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be
secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected,
or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or
slavery, or to the unnatural lust of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will
be so subjected or disposed of, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
141. Whoever imports into India from any country outside India any girl under the age
of twenty-one years or any boy under the age of eighteen years with intent that girl or boy
may be, or knowing it to be likely that girl or boy will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse
with another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine.
142. Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted,
wrongfully conceals or confines such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he
had kidnapped or abducted such person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the
same purpose as that with or for which he conceals or detains such person in confinement.
143. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation recruits, transports, harbours, transfers,
or receives a person or persons, by—
(a) using threats; or
(b) using force, or any other form of coercion; or
(c) by abduction; or
(d) by practising fraud, or deception; or
(e) by abuse of power; or
Kidnapping or
abducting in
order to
murder or for
ransom, etc.
Importation
of girl or boy
from foreign
country.
Wrongfully
concealing or
keeping in
confinement,
kidnapped or
abducted
person.
Trafficking of
person.

(f) by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in
order to achieve the consent of any person having control over the person recruited,
transported, harboured, transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.—The expression “exploitation” shall include any act of physical
exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude,
beggary or forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.—The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the offence
of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a child, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one child, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of a child on more than one
occasion, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any person
then, such public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
144. (1)Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a child has been trafficked,
engages such child for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a person has been trafficked,
engages such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
145. Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics or deals in
slaves, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
146. Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the will of that person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Exploitation
of a trafficked
person.
Habitual
dealing in
slaves.
Unlawful
compulsory
labour.

CHAPTERVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
147. Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such
war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life
and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration.
Ajoins an insurrection against the Government of India.Ahas committed the offence
defined in this section.
148. Whoever within or without and beyond India conspires to commit any of the
offences punishable by section 147, or conspires to overawe, by means of criminal force or
the show of criminal force, the Central Government or any State Government, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary that
any act or illegal omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.
149. Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war
with the intention of either waging or being prepared to wage war against the Government of
India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for
a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
150. Whoever by any act, or by any illegal omission, conceals the existence of a
design to wage war against the Government of India, intending by such concealment to
facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will facilitate, the waging of such
war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
151. Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the President of India, or
Governor of any State, to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful
powers of such President or Governor, assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully
to restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, or attempts
so to overawe, such President or Governor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
152. Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial
mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or armed rebellion or subversive
activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity
and integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation.––Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures, or administrative
or other action of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means
without exciting or attempting to excite the activities referred to in this section do not constitute
an offence under this section.
153. Whoever wages war against the Government of any foreign State at peace with
the Government of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or
with fine.
Waging, or
attempting to
wage war, or
abetting
waging of war,
against
Government
of India.
Conspiracy to
commit
offences
punishable by
section 147.
Collecting
arms, etc.,
with intention
of waging war
against
Government
of India.
Concealing
with intent to
facilitate
design to wage
war.
Assaulting
President,
Governor, etc.,
with intent to
compel or
restrain
exercise of any
lawful power.
Act
endangering
sovereignty,
unity and
integrity of
India.
Waging war
against
Government
of any foreign
State at peace
with
Government
of India.

154. Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on
the territories of any foreign State at peace with the Government of India, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in
committing such depredation, or acquired by such depredation.
155. Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the
commission of any of the offences mentioned in sections 153 and 154, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so received.
156. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such prisoner to escape from any place in which such
prisoner is confined, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
157. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or
prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from any place of confinement in
which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
158. Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State prisoner or prisoner of war in
escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue any such prisoner, or harbours
or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or offers or attempts to
offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner, shall be punished with imprisonment
for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on
his parole within certain limits in India, is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes
beyond the limits within which he is allowed to be at large.
CHAPTERVIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THEARMY, NAVY ANDAIR FORCE
159. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India or attempts to seduce any such
officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his allegiance or his duty, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
160. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in
the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India, shall, if mutiny be committed in
consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
161. Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy orAir Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the execution
of his office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Committing
depredation on
territories of
foreign State
at peace with
Government
of India.
Receiving
property taken
by war or
depredation
mentioned in
sections 153
and 154.
Public servant
voluntarily
allowing
prisoner of
State or war to
escape.
Public servant
negligently
suffering such
prisoner to
escape.
Aiding escape
of, rescuing or
harbouring
such prisoner.
Abetting
mutiny, or
attempting to
seduce a
soldier, sailor
or airman
from his duty.
Abetment of
mutiny, if
mutiny is
committed in
consequence
thereof.
Abetment of
assault by
soldier, sailor
or airman on
his superior
officer, when
in execution of
his office.

162. Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in the Army,
Navy orAir Force of the Government of India, on any superior officer being in the execution
of his office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of that abetment be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
163. Whoever abets the desertion of any officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in theArmy,
Navy orAir Force of the Government of India, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
164. Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to believe
that an officer, soldier, sailor or airman, in theArmy, Navy orAir Force of the Government of
India, has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine or
with both.
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is given
by the spouse of the deserter.
165. The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any
deserter from the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India is concealed, shall,
though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not exceeding three thousand
rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but for some neglect of his duty as such
master or person in charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of the vessel.
166. Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer,
soldier, sailor or airman, in theArmy, Navy orAir Force, of the Government of India, shall, if
such act of insubordination be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
167. No person subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act, 1950 and the Navy
Act, 1957, or shall be subject to punishment under this Sanhita for any of the offences
defined in this Chapter.
168.Whoever, not being a soldier, sailor or airman in theArmy, Naval orAir service of
the Government of India, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token
used by such a soldier, sailor or airman with the intention that it may be believed that he is
such a soldier, sailor or airman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both.
CHAPTERIX
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
169. For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any
election;
(b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to
withdraw from being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election.
170. (1) Whoever—
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any
other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having
exercised any such right; or
Abetment of
such assault, if
assault
committed.
Abetment of
desertion of
soldier, sailor
or airman.
Harbouring
deserter.
Deserter
concealed on
board
merchant
vessel through
negligence of
master.
Abetment of
act of
insubordination
by soldier,
sailor or
airman.
Persons subject
to certain
Acts.
Wearing garb
or carrying
token used by
soldier, sailor
or airman.
Candidate,
electoral right
defined.
Bribery.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.

(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a
reward for exercising any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other
person to exercise any such right,
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an
offence under this section.
(2)Aperson who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a gratification
shall be deemed to give a gratification.
(3)A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification shall
be deemed to accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for
doing what he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be
deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward.
171. (1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of
any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
(2)Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), whoever—
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter
is interested, with injury of any kind; or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any
person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine
displeasure or of spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or
voter, within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3)Adeclaration of public policy or a promise of public action or the mere exercise or
a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be
interference within the meaning of this section.
172. Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper on votes in the name of any
other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own name, and whoever
abets, procures or attempts to procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits
the offence of personation at an election:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been authorised
to vote as proxy for an elector under any law for the time being in force in so far as he votes
as a proxy for such elector.
173. Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation.—“Treating” means that form of bribery where the gratification consists
in food, drink, entertainment, or provision.
174. Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or personation at an election
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year or with fine, or with both.
175. Whoever with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any
statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or
conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine.
Undue
influence at
elections.
Personation at
elections.
Punishment
for bribery.
Punishment
for undue
influence or
personation at
an election.
False
statement in
connection
with an
election.

176. Whoever without the general or special authority in writing of a candidate incurs
or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public meeting, or upon any
advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the purpose of
promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees:
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the
amount of ten rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such
expenses were incurred the approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have
incurred such expenses with the authority of the candidate.
177. Whoever being required by any law for the time being in force or any rule having
the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an election
fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
CHAPTER X
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY-NOTES, BANK-NOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
178. Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process
of counterfeiting, any coin, stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue,
currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(1) the expression “bank-note” means a promissory note or engagement for the
payment of money to bearer on demand issued by any person carrying on the business
of banking in any part of the world, or issued by or under the authority of any State or
Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or as a substitute for
money;
(2) “coin” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the
CoinageAct, 2011 and includes metal used for the time being as money and is stamped
and issued by or under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power intended to be
so used;
(3) a person commits the offence of “counterfeiting Government stamp” who
counterfeits by causing a genuine stamp of one denomination to appear like a genuine
stamp of a different denomination;
(4) a person commits the offence of counterfeiting coin who intending to practise
deception, or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practised, causes a
genuine coin to appear like a different coin; and
(5) the offence of “counterfeiting coin” includes diminishing the weight or
alteration of the composition, or alteration of the appearance of the coin.
179. Whoever imports or exports, or sells or delivers to, or buys or receives from, any
other person, or otherwise traffics or uses as genuine, any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp,
currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
180. Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit coin, stamp,
currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or
counterfeit and intending to use the same as genuine or that it may be used as genuine, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—If a person establishes the possession of the forged or counterfeit
coin, stamp, currency-note or bank-note to be from a lawful source, it shall not constitute an
offence under this section.
Illegal
payments in
connection
with an
election.
Failure to keep
election
accounts.
Counterfeiting
coin,
Government
stamps,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Using as
genuine, forged
or counterfeit
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Possession of
forged or
counterfeit
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
11 of 2011.

181. Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of making or
mending, or buys or sells or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, die, or
instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe
that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting any coin, stamp issued by
Government for the purpose of revenue, currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
182. (1) Whoever makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever,
or delivers to any person, any document purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so
nearly resembling as to be calculated to deceive, any currency-note or bank-note shall be
punished with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an
offence under sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police officer
on being so required the name and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise
made, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to six hundred rupees.
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any
person is charged with an offence under sub-section (1) or on any other document used or
distributed in connection with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed
that the person caused the document to be made.
183. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, removes or
effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of
revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used, or removes from any
writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or document, in order that
such stamp may be used for a different writing or document, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
184. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for
any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, which he knows to
have been before used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
185. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to Government, erases or
removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, any mark, put or
impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the same has been used, or
knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such
mark has been erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he knows to
have been used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
186. (1) Whoever—
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamp, or knowingly
uses for any postal purpose any fictitious stamp; or
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp; or
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die, plate,
instrument or materials for making any fictitious stamp,
Making or
possessing
instruments or
materials for
forging or
counterfeiting
coin,
Government
stamp,
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Making or
using
documents
resembling
currency-notes
or bank-notes.
Effacing
writing from
substance
bearing
Government
stamp, or
removing from
document a
stamp used for
it, with intent
to cause loss to
Government.
Using
Government
stamp known
to have been
before used.
Erasure of
mark denoting
that stamp has
been used.
Prohibition of
fictitious
stamps.

shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
(2)Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of any person
for making any fictitious stamp may be seized and, if seized shall be forfeited.
(3) In this section “fictitious stamp” means any stamp falsely purporting to be issued
by Government for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or
representation, whether on paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for that
purpose.
(4) In this section and also in sections 178 to 181 (both inclusive), and sections 183 to
185 (both inclusive) the word “Government”, when used in connection with, or in reference
to any stamp issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, shall, notwithstanding
anything in clause (12) of section 2, be deemed to include the person or persons authorised
by law to administer executive Government in any part of India or in any foreign country.
187. Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in India, does any act,
or omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin issued from
that mint to be of a different weight or composition from the weight or composition fixed by
law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
188. Whoever, without lawful authority, takes out of any mint, lawfully established in
India, any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
CHAPTERXI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
189. (1)An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful assembly”, if
the common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
(a) tooverawebycriminalforce,orshowofcriminalforce,theCentralGovernment
or any State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public
servant in the exercise of the lawful power of such public servant; or
(b) to resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
(c) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
(d) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to take or
obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a
right of way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession
or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
(e) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any person to
do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do.
Explanation.—An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
(2) Whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly,
intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful
assembly and such member shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful
assembly has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
Person
employed in
mint causing
coin to be of
different
weight or
composition
from that
fixed by law.
Unlawfully
taking coining
instrument
from mint.
Unlawful
assembly.

(4) Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
(5) Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons
likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been lawfully
commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of
sub-section (1), the offender shall be punishable under sub-section (3).
(6) Whoever hires or engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring,
engagement or employment of any person to join or become a member of any unlawful
assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful assembly, and for any offence
which may be committed by any such person as a member of such unlawful assembly in
pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner as if he had been
a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such offence.
(7) Whoever harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his
occupation or charge, or under his control any persons knowing that such persons have
been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged or employed, to join or
become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(8) Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or
assist in doing any of the acts specified in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(9) Whoever, being so engaged or hired as referred to in sub-section (8), goes armed,
or engages or offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a
weapon of offence is likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
190. If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution
of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be
likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the
committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence.
191. (1) Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any
member thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of
such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
(2) Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or
with both.
192.Whoever malignantly, or wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives
provocation to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will
cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in
consequence of such provocation, be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both; and if the offence of rioting
be not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
Every member
of unlawful
assembly guilty
of offence
committed in
prosecution of
common
object.
Rioting.
Wantonly
giving
provocation
with intent to
cause riot-if
rioting be
committed; if
not
committed.

193. (1) Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of
the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot is committed, and any
person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding
one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence is being or
has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not give
the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the officer in charge at the nearest
police station, and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that it was about
to be committed, use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its
taking place, do not use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot
or unlawful assembly.
(2) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place or who claims any
interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if he or
his agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed or
that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not
respectively use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent such assembly or riot from
taking place, and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
(3) Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the
owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any
interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, the agent or manager of such person shall be
punishable with fine, if such agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was
likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was
likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such riot or assembly
from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
194. (1) When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public
peace, they are said to commit an affray.
(2)Whoever commitsanaffray,shall be punished with imprisonmentofeitherdescription
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
195. (1) Whoever assaults or obstructs any public servant or uses criminal force on
any public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant in endeavouring to
disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever threatens to assault or attempts to obstruct any public servant or threatens
or attempts to use criminal force to any public servant in the discharge of his duty as such
public servant in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or
affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine, or with both.
196. (1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations
or through electronic communication or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote,
on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or
any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities; or
Liability of
owner,
occupier, etc.,
of land on
which an
unlawful
assembly or
riot takes
place.
Affray.
Assaulting or
obstructing
public servant
when
suppressing
riot, etc.
Promoting
enmity
between
different
groups on
grounds of
religion, race,
place of birth,
residence,
language, etc.,
and doing acts
prejudicial to
maintenance
of harmony.

(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and
which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquillity; or
(c) organises any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that
the participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence
or knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence, or participates in such activity intending to use or be
trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the participants
in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, against any
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and such activity
for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of
insecurity amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or
caste or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
197. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible
representations or through electronic communication or otherwise,—
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by
reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or
caste or community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established or uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons
shall, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional
group or caste or community, be denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India; or
(c) makes or publishes any assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the
obligation of any class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious,
racial, language or regional group or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel,
plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or
ill-will between such members and other persons; or
(d) makes or publishes false or misleading information, jeopardising the
sovereignty, unity and integrity or security of India,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
CHAPTERXII
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
198. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as
to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will by such disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
Imputations,
assertions
prejudicial to
national
integration.
Public servant
disobeying law,
with intent to
cause injury to
any person.

Illustration.
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy a
decree pronounced in Z’s favour by a Court, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with
the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
199. Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a)knowinglydisobeysanydirectionofthelawwhichprohibitshimfrom requiring
the attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an
offence or any other matter; or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of
the law regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation; or
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section (1) of
section 173 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 in relation to cognizable
offence punishable under section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68,
section 70, section 71, section 74, section 76, section 77, section 79, section 124,
section 143 or section 144,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine.
200. Whoever, being in charge of a hospital, public or private, whether run by the
Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, contravenes
the provisions of section 397 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.
201. Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with
the preparation or translation of any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or
translates that document or electronic record in a manner which he knows or believes to be
incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
202. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant
not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both or with community service.
203. Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant,
not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases or bids for that property, either in his
own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in shares with others, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;
and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated.
204. Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant, knowing that
he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such office, and
in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to three years and with fine.
205. Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or
carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public servants, with
the intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that
he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
Public servant
disobeying
direction under
law.
Punishment
for nontreatment of
victim.
Public servant
framing an
incorrect
document with
intent to cause
injury.
Public servant
unlawfully
engaging in
trade.
Public servant
unlawfully
buying or
bidding for
property.
Personating a
public servant.
Wearing garb
or carrying
token used by
public servant
with fraudulent
intent.

CHAPTERXIII
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS
206. Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served with a summons, notice or
order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue
such summons, notice or order,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where such summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or
to produce a document or an electronic record in a Court shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
207. Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any
other person, of any summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, or intentionally
prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any such summons, notice or order or intentionally
removes any such summons, notice or order from any place to which it is lawfully affixed or
intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, under the authority of any
public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be
made,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by
agent, or to produce a document or electronic record in a Court, with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
208. Whoever, being legally bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place
and time in obedience to a summons, notice, order, or proclamation proceeding from any
public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to issue the same, intentionally
omits to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he is bound to attend
before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by
agent in a Court with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before a High Court, in obedience to a
subpoena issuing from that Court, intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a District Judge, as a witness, in
obedience to a summons issued by that District Judge intentionally omits to appear.A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
209. Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as required
by a proclamation published under sub-section (1) of section 84 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service, and where a declaration has
been made under sub-section (4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed offender,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
Absconding to
avoid service
of summons or
other
proceeding.
Preventing
service of
summons or
other
proceeding, or
preventing
publication
thereof.
Nonattendance in
obedience to
an order from
public servant.
Nonappearance in
response to a
proclamation
under
section 84 of
Bharatiya
Nagarik
Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023.

210. Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any document or electronic
record to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the
same,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) and where the document or electronic record is to be produced or delivered
up to a Court with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustration.
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a District Court, intentionally
omits to produce the same. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
211. Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any
subject to any public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to furnish
such information in the manner and at the time required by law,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the notice or information required to be given respects the commission
of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an
offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both;
(c) where the notice or information required to be given is required by an order
passed under section 394 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
212. Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any subject to any
public servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or has
reason to believe to be false,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;
(b) where the information which he is legally bound to give respects the
commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission
of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a)A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the limits of
his estate, wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred
by accident in consequence of the bite of a snake. Ais guilty of the offence defined in
this section.
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of strangers has
passed through his village in order to commit a dacoity in the house of Z, a wealthy
merchant residing in a neighbouring place, and being legally bound to give early and
punctual information of the above fact to the officer of the nearest police station,
wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious characters passed
through the village with a view to commit dacoity in a certain distant place in a different
direction. Here A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Omission to
produce
document or
electronic
record to
public servant
by person
legally bound
to produce it.
Omission to
give notice or
information to
public servant
by person
legally bound
to give it.
Furnishing
false
information.

Explanation.—In section 211 and in this section the word “offence” include any act
committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable
under any of the following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of
section 309, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312, clauses (f) and (g) of
section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of
section 332 and the word “offender” includes any person who is alleged to have been
guilty of any such act.
213. Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath or affirmation to state the truth,
when required so to bind himself by a public servant legally competent to require that he
shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
214. Whoever, being legally bound to state the truth on any subject to any public
servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him touching that subject by such
public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
215. Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when required to sign
that statement by a public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
216. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or affirmation to state the truth on
any subject to any public servant or other person authorised by law to administer such
oath or affirmation, makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid, touching
that subject, any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
217. Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or
believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, such public servant—
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit
if the true state of facts respecting which such information is given were known by
him; or
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance
of any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police officer, subordinate to such Magistrate,
has been guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be false,
and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to dismiss Z. A
has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a secret place,
knowing such information to be false, and knowing that it is likely that the consequence
of the information will be a search of Z’s premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
Refusing oath
or affirmation
when duly
required by
public servant
to make it.
Refusing to
answer public
servant
authorised to
question.
Refusing to
sign statement.
False
statement on
oath or
affirmation to
public servant
or person
authorised to
administer an
oath or
affirmation.
False
information,
with intent to
cause public
servant to use
his lawful
power to
injury of
another
person.

(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and robbed in the
neighbourhood of a particular village. He does not mention the name of any person as one
of his assailants, but knows it to be likely that in consequence of this information the
police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance of the
villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence under this section.
218. Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful
authority of any public servant, knowing or having reason to believe that he is such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both.
219. Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the
lawful authority of any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
220. Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public
servant, as such, purchases or bids for any property on account of any person, whether
himself or any other, whom he knows to be under a legal incapacity to purchase that
property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to perform the obligations
under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
221. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public servant in the discharge of his
public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand and
five hundred rupees, or with both.
222. Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public
servant in the execution of his public duty, intentionally omits to give such assistance,––
(a) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one month, or with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred
rupees, or with both;
(b) and where such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally
competent to make such demand for the purposes of executing any process lawfully
issued by a Court or of preventing the commission of an offence, or suppressing a
riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or
of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
223. Whoever, knowing that, by an order promulgated by a public servant lawfully
empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain from a certain act, or to take
certain order with certain property in his possession or under his management, disobeys
such direction,––
(a) shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance
or injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfully employed,
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees, or with both;
Resistance to
taking of
property by
lawful
authority of a
public servant.
Obstructing
sale of
property
offered for sale
by authority of
public servant.
Illegal purchase
or bid for
property
offered for sale
by authority of
public servant.
Obstructing
public servant
in discharge of
public
functions.
Omission to
assist public
servant when
bound by law
to give
assistance.
Disobedience
to order duly
promulgated
by public
servant.

(b) and where such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human
life, health or safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm,
or contemplate his disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of
the order which he disobeys, and that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce,
harm.
Illustration.
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate
such order, directing that a religious procession shall not pass down a certain street. A
knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
224. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person
in whom he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of inducing that
public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the
exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
225. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of
inducing that person to refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection
against any injury to any public servant legally empowered as such to give such protection,
or to cause such protection to be given, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
226. Whoever attempts to commit suicide with the intent to compel or restrain any
public servant from discharging his official duty shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both, or with community
service.
CHAPTERXIV
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
227. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of law to
state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not
believe to be true, is said to give false evidence.
Explanation 1.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is
made verbally or otherwise.
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within
the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by
stating that he believes a thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he
knows a thing which he does not know.
Illustrations.
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees,
falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z admit the justice of B’s claim. A has given false
evidence.
Threat of
injury to
public servant.
Threat of
injury to
induce person
to refrain
from applying
for protection
to public
servant.
Attempt to
commit suicide
to compel or
restrain
exercise of
lawful power.
Giving false
evidence.

(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain
signature to be the handwriting of Z, when he does not believe it to be the handwriting of
Z. Here A states that which he knows to be false, and therefore gives false evidence.
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z’s handwriting, states that he believes a
certain signature to be the handwriting of Z; A in good faith believing it to be so. Here A’s
statement is merely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, although the
signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at
a particular place on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A gives
false evidence whether Z was at that place on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or
translation of a statement or document which he is bound by oath to interpret or translate
truly, that which is not and which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or
translation. A has given false evidence.
228. Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false entry in any
book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing
a false statement, intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may
appear in evidence in a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public
servant as such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false
statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause any person who in such proceeding is to
form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching any point
material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence”.
Illustrations.
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be
found in that box, and that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has
fabricated false evidence.
(b)A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative
evidence in a Court. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c)A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes
a letter in imitation of Z’s handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in
such criminal conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the officers of
the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false evidence.
229. (1) Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any case other than
that referred to in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees.
Fabricating
false evidence.
Punishment
for false
evidence.

Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before
a Court, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place
before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z
ought to be committed for trial, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As
this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence.
Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court according to law, and
conducted under the authority of a Court, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that
investigation may not take place before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court to ascertain on the spot the
boundaries of land, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this
enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence.
230. (1) Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which is capital by the law for the time being in force in India shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(2) If an innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of false evidence
referred to in sub-section (1), the person who gives such false evidence shall be punished
either with death or the punishment specified in sub-section (1).
231. Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which by the law for the time being in force in India is not capital, but punishable
with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be
punished as a person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished.
Illustration.
A gives false evidence before a Court, intending thereby to cause Z to be convicted
of a dacoity. The punishment of dacoity is imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, with or without fine. A, therefore, is liable to
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, with or without fine.
232. (1) Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or
property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with
intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) If innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of false evidence
referred to in sub-section (1), with death or imprisonment for more than seven years, the
person who threatens shall be punished with the same punishment and sentence in the
same manner and to the same extent such innocent person is punished and sentenced.
Giving or
fabricating
false evidence
with intent to
procure
conviction of
capital
offence.
Giving or
fabricating
false evidence
with intent to
procure
conviction of
offence
punishable with
imprisonment
for life or
imprisonment.
Threatening
any person to
give false
evidence.

233. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or genuine evidence any
evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
234. Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to be given or signed,
or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence, knowing
or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he gave false evidence.
235. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true
certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the
same manner as if he gave false evidence.
236. Whoever, in any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any
Court or any public servant or other person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as
evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, touching any point material to the
object for which the declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as
if he gave false evidence.
237. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true any such declaration,
knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some
informality, is a declaration within the meaning of section 236 and this section.
238. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any
information respecting the offence which he knows or believes to be false shall,—
(a) if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is
punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending
to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of
screening B from punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for seven
years, and also to fine.
239. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, intentionally omits to give any information respecting that offence which he is
legally bound to give, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
or with both.
Using evidence
known to be
false.
Issuing or
signing false
certificate.
Using as true a
certificate
known to be
false.
False
statement
made in
declaration
which is by
law receivable
as evidence.
Using as true
such
declaration
knowing it to
be false.
Causing
disappearance
of evidence of
offence, or
giving false
information
to screen
offender.
Intentional
omission to
give
information
of offence by
person bound
to inform.

240. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, gives any information respecting that offence which he knows or believes to
be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—In sections 238 and 239 and in this section the word “offence”
includes any act committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would
be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2),
(3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312,
clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 331,
clauses (a) and (b) of section 332.
241. Whoever secretes or destroys any document or electronic record which he
may be lawfully compelled to produce as evidence in a Court or in any proceeding
lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or obliterates or renders illegible the whole
or any part of such document or electronic record with the intention of preventing the
same from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public servant as
aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same
for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
or with both.
242. Whoever falsely personates another, and in such assumed character makes
any admission or statement, or confesses judgment, or causes any process to be issued or
becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit or criminal prosecution, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
243. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person
any property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest
therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which
has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be pronounced, by a Court or
other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or order which has
been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court in a civil suit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
244. Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest
therein, knowing that he has no right or rightful claim to such property or interest, or
practises any deception touching any right to any property or any interest therein,
intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture
or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he
knows to be likely to be pronounced by a Court or other competent authority, or from
being taken in execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to
be likely to be made by a Court in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
245. Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be passed against
him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum than is due to such
person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled, or
fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has
been satisfied, or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
Giving false
information
respecting an
offence
committed.
Destruction of
document or
electronic
record to
prevent its
production as
evidence.
False
personation
for purpose of
act or
proceeding in
suit or
prosecution.
Fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.
Fraudulent
claim to
property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.
Fraudulently
suffering
decree for sum
not due.

Illustration.
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against
him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of
B, who has no just claim against him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the
benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of Z’s property which may be made
under A’s decree. Z has committed an offence under this section.
246. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any
person, makes in a Court any claim which he knows to be false, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
247. Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or order against any person for a sum
not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest in property to which
he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against any
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied,
or fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
248. Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or causes to be
instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely charges any person with
having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such
proceeding or charge against that person,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with
both;
(b) if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for ten years or upwards,
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
249. Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or conceals a
person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of
screening him from legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable
to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one
year, and not to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided
for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.––“Offence” in this section includes any act committed at any place
out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following
sections, namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312, clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4),
(6), (7) and (8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of section 332 and every such act shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had
been guilty of it in India.
Dishonestly
making false
claim in
Court.
Fraudulently
obtaining
decree for sum
not due.
False charge
of offence
made with
intent to
injure.
Harbouring
offender.

Exception.—This section shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen
him from legal punishment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment for life, A is liable to
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable
to fine.
250. Whoever accepts or attempts to obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification
for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property to himself or any other
person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any person from
legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the
purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,––
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years,
be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
251. Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification
to any person, or restores or causes the restoration of any property to any person, in
consideration of that person’s concealing an offence, or of his screening any person from
legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the
purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,––
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years,
be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Exception.—The provisions of this section and section 250 do not extend to any
case in which the offence may lawfully be compounded.
252. Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under pretence
or on account of helping any person to recover any movable property of which he shall
have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Sanhita, shall, unless he uses
all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the
Taking gift,
etc., to screen
an offender
from
punishment.
Offering gift
or restoration
of property in
consideration
of screening
offender.
Taking gift to
help to
recover stolen
property, etc.

offence, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
253. Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful
custody for that offence, escapes from such custody, or whenever a public servant, in the
exercise of the lawful powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be
apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order for apprehension,
harbours or conceals that person with the intention of preventing him from being
apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, namely:––
(a) if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be
apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, with or without fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one
year and not to ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence, or with fine, or with
both.
Explanation.––“Offence” in this section includes also any act or omission of which
a person is alleged to have been guilty out of India, which, if he had been guilty of it in
India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law
relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in
India, and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to
be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the
harbour or concealment is by the spouse of the person to be apprehended.
254. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that any persons are about to
commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours them or any of them, with
the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of screening
them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery
or dacoity is intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the
harbour is by the spouse of the offender.
255. Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law
as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal
punishment, or subject him to a less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with
intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or
any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Harbouring
offender who
has escaped
from custody
or whose
apprehension
has been
ordered.
Penalty for
harbouring
robbers or
dacoits.
Public servant
disobeying
direction of
law with
intent to save
person from
punishment or
property from
forfeiture.

256. Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public servant, charged
with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal
punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any
property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
257. Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces
in any stage of a judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he
knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
258. Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit persons
for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously
commits any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the
exercise of that authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, or with fine, or with both.
259. Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended
for an offence, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such
person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting to escape
from such confinement, shall be punished,––
(a) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to
have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an
offence punishable with death; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have
been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence
punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been
apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term less than ten years.
260. Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court for any
offence or lawfully committed to custody, intentionally omits to apprehend such person,
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping
or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, is under sentence of
death; or
Public servant
framing
incorrect
record or
writing with
intent to save
person from
punishment or
property from
forfeiture.
Public servant
in judicial
proceeding
corruptly
making report,
etc., contrary
to law.
Commitment
for trial or
confinement by
person having
authority who
knows that he is
acting contrary
to law.
Intentional
omission to
apprehend on
part of public
servant bound
to apprehend.
Intentional
omission to
apprehend on
part of public
servant bound
to apprehend
person under
sentence or
lawfully
committed.

(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to have
been apprehended, is subject, by a sentence of a Court, or by virtue of a commutation
of such sentence, to imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of ten years, or
upwards; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both, if the person in confinement or who ought to
have been apprehended, is subject by a sentence of a Court to imprisonment for a
term not extending to ten years or if the person was lawfully committed to custody.
261. Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep
in confinement any person charged with or convicted of any offence or lawfully committed
to custody, negligently suffers such person to escape from confinement, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
262. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of himself for any offence with which he is charged or of which he has been
convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully
detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for
which the person to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with
which he was charged, or of which he was convicted.
263. Whoever, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of any other person for an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any
other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully detained for an offence,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; or
(b) if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be
rescued, is charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(c) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(d) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
liable under the sentence of a Court or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence,
to imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(e) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is
under sentence of death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Resistance or
obstruction by
a person to his
lawful
apprehension.
Escape from
confinement
or custody
negligently
suffered by
public servant.
Resistance or
obstruction to
lawful
apprehension
of another
person.

264. Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 259,
section 260 or section 261, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend
that person or suffers him to escape from confinement, shall be punished—
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
265. Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 262 or section 263 or in any
other law for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction
to the lawful apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to
escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue
any other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully detained, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both.
266. Whoever, having accepted any conditional remission of punishment, knowingly
violates any condition on which such remission was granted, shall be punished with the
punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already suffered no part of that
punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much of that
punishment as he has not already suffered.
267. Whoever, intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public
servant, while such public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
268. Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or knowingly
suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as an assessor in any case in which he
knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing
himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily
serve as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
269. Whoever, having been charged with an offence and released on bail bond or on
bond, fails without sufficient cause (the burden of proving which shall lie upon him), to
appear in Court in accordance with the terms of the bail or bond, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
Explanation.—The punishment under this section is—
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a
conviction for the offence with which he has been charged; and
(b) without prejudice to the power of the Court to order forfeiture of the bond.
CHAPTER XV
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND
MORALS
270. A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an illegal
omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the
people in general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily
cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use
any public right but a common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some
convenience or advantage.
Omission to
apprehend, or
sufferance of
escape, on
part of public
servant, in
cases not
otherwise
provided for.
Resistance or
obstruction to
lawful
apprehension
or escape or
rescue in cases
not otherwise
provided for.
Violation of
condition of
remission of
punishment.
Intentional
insult or
interruption
to public
servant sitting
in judicial
proceeding.
Personation
of assessor.
Failure by
person
released on
bail bond or
bond to
appear in
Court.
Public
nuisance.

271. Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or
has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
272. Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason
to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
273. Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made by the Government for putting any
mode of transport into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the intercourse of any such
transport in a state of quarantine or for regulating the intercourse between places where an
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
274. Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be
likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both.
275. Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which
has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or
having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
276. Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner as to
lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be
sold or used for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
277. Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been adulterated in
such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for medicinal
purposes as unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not
knowing of the adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
or with both.
278. Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary
for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as a different drug or medical
preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
279. Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water of any public spring or reservoir,
so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
280. Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any place so as to make it noxious
to the health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the neighbourhood or
passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
281. Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
Negligent act
likely to spread
infection of
disease
dangerous to
life.
Malignant act
likely to spread
infection of
diseasedangerous
to life.
Disobedience
to quarantine
rule.
Adulteration
of food or
drink intended
for sale.
Sale of noxious
food or drink.
Adulteration
of drugs.
Sale of
adulterated
drugs.
Sale of drug as
a different
drug or
preparation.
Fouling water
of public
spring or
reservoir.
Making
atmosphere
noxious to
health.
Rash driving
or riding on a
public way.

person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
282. Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger
human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
283. Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy, intending or knowing it to be
likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees.
284. Whoever knowingly or negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire,
any person by water in any vessel, when that vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to
endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both.
285. Whoever, by doing any act, or by omitting to take order with any property in his
possession or under his charge, causes danger, obstruction or injury to any person in any
public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.
286. Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any person or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous substance in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
poisonous substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
287.Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently
as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire or any combustible matter in
his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
fire or combustible matter, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees,
or with both.
288. Whoever does, with any explosive substance, any act so rashly or negligently as
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive substance in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that
substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
289.Whoever does, with any machinery, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger
human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person or knowingly or
negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or under his care
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
290. Whoever, in pulling down, repairing or constructing any building, knowingly or
negligently omits to take such measures with that building as is sufficient to guard against
any probable danger to human life from the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
Rash navigation
of vessel.
Exhibition of
false light,
mark or buoy.
Conveying
person by
water for hire
in unsafe or
overloaded
vessel.
Danger or
obstruction in
public way or
line of
navigation.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
poisonous
substance.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to fire
or combustible
matter.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
explosive
substance.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
machinery.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
pulling down,
repairing or
constructing
buildings, etc.

291. Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take such measures with any animal
in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life, or any
probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both.
292. Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this
Sanhita shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
293. Whoever repeats or continues a public nuisance, having been enjoined by any
public servant who has lawful authority to issue such injunction not to repeat or continue
such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
294. (1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting, representation, figure or any other object, including display of any content in
electronic form shall be deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one
of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are
likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or
embodied in it.
(2) Whoever—
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts into
circulation, or for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation,
makes, produces or has in his possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing,
painting, representation or figure or any other obscene object whatsoever in whatever
manner; or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes
aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to
hire, distributed or publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation; or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he
knows or has reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the
purposes aforesaid, made produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed,
publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation; or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is
engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that
any such obscene object can be procured from or through any person; or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the
event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
Exception.—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or
figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other objects of general concern; or
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
animal.
Punishment for
public nuisance
in cases not
otherwise
provided for.
Continuance of
nuisance after
injunction
to
discontinue.
Sale, etc., of
obscene books,
etc.

(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented
on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of theAncient Monuments
andArchaeological Sites and RemainsAct, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or
used for any religious purpose.
295. Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to any child any such
obscene object as is referred to in section 294, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the
event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
296. Whoever, to the annoyance of others,—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place; or
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any
public place,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
297. (1) Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any lottery not
being a State lottery or a lottery authorised by the State Government, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or
with both.
(2) Whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do
or forbear from doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency
relative or applicable to the drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
298. Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held
sacred by any class of persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any
class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to consider such
destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
299.Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings
of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or through electronic means or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the
religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
300. Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in
the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
Sale, etc., of
obscene
objects to
child.
Obscene acts
and songs.
Keeping
lottery office.
Injuring or
defiling place
of worship
with intent to
insult religion
of any class.
Deliberate and
malicious acts,
intended to
outrage
religious
feelings of any
class by
insulting its
religion or
religious
beliefs.
Disturbing
religious
assembly.
24 of 1958.

301.Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of any person, or of insulting
the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any person are likely to
be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby, commits any
trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulchre, or any place set apart for the
performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any
indignity to any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the
performance of funeral ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
302. Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any
person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any
gesture in the sight of that person or places any object in the sight of that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER XVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of theft
303. (1) Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the
possession of any person without that person’s consent, moves that property in order to
such taking, is said to commit theft.
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable
property, is not the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as
soon as it is severed from the earth.
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance may
be a theft.
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle
which prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by
actually moving it.
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to
move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused,
is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in this section may be express or implied,
and may be given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that
purpose authority either express or implied.
Illustrations.
(a)A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the tree
out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order
to such taking, he has committed theft.
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it. Here, if
A’s intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. A
has committed theft as soon as Z’s dog has begun to follow A.
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain
direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins
to move, A has committed theft of the treasure.
(d) A being Z’s servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z’s plate, dishonestly runs
away with the plate, without Z’s consent. A has committed theft.
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate toA, the keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall
return.Acarries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z’s possession.
It could not therefore be taken out of Z’s possession, and A has not committed theft, though
he may have committed criminal breach of trust.
Trespassing on
burial places,
etc.
Uttering words,
etc., with
deliberate
intent to
wound religious
feelings of any
person.
Theft.

(f)Afinds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the ring
is in Z’s possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft.
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by
taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of property.
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z’s house. Not venturing to
misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of search and detection, A hides the ring in a
place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the intention of taking
the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of
first moving the ring, commits theft.
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweler, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A, not
owing to the jeweler any debt for which the jeweler might lawfully detain the watch as a
security, enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z’s hand, and carries it away.
Here A, though he may have committed criminal trespass and assault, has not committed
theft, in as much as what he did was not done dishonestly.
(j) IfAowes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully as
a security for the debt, and A takes the watch out of Z’s possession, with the intention of
depriving Z of the property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, in as much as he takes
it dishonestly.
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z’s possession without
Z’s consent, not having paid what he borrowed on the watch, he commits theft, though the
watch is his own property in as much as he takes it dishonestly.
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent, with
the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here
A takes dishonestly; A has therefore committed theft.
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes
away a book without Z’s express consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the
intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have conceived that he had Z’s
implied consent to use Z’s book. If this was A’s impression, A has not committed theft.
(n)Aasks charity from Z’s wife. She givesAmoney, food and clothes, whichAknows
to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable thatAmay conceive that Z’s wife is authorised
to give away alms. If this was A’s impression, Ahas not committed theft.
(o) A is the paramour of Z’s wife. She gives a valuable property, which A knows to
belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as she has no authority from Z to give. If
A takes the property dishonestly, he commits theft.
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A’s own property, takes
that property out of Z’s possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not
commit theft.
(2) Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both and in case of second
or subsequent conviction of any person under this section, he shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to five years and with fine:
Provided that in cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is less than five
thousand rupees, and a person is convicted for the first time, shall upon return of the value
of property or restoration of the stolen property, shall be punished with community service.

304. (1) Theft is snatching if, in order to commit theft, the offender suddenly or quickly
or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any person or from his possession
any movable property.
(2) Whoever commits snatching, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
305. Whoever commits theft—
(a) in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or used for the
custody of property; or
(b) of any means of transport used for the transport of goods or passengers; or
(c) of any article or goods from any means of transport used for the transport of
goods or passengers; or
(d) of idol or icon in any place of worship; or
(e) of any property of the Government or of a local authority,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
306. Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or
servant, commits theft in respect of any property in the possession of his master or employer,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
307. Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing
of such theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or
in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations.
(a)Acommits theft on property in Z’s possession; and while committing this theft, he
has a loaded pistol under his garment, having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting
Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b)Apicks Z’s pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order that
they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt
to apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of extortion
308. (1) Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or
to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any
person any property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted
into a valuable security, commits extortion.
Illustrations.
(a)A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him money.
He thus induces Z to give him money. A has committed extortion.
(b)Athreatens Z that he will keep Z’s child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign
and deliver toAa promissory note binding Z to pay certain monies toA. Z signs and delivers
the note.A has committed extortion.
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and deliver
to B a bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby
induces Z to sign and deliver the bond. A has committed extortion.
Snatching.
Theft in a
dwelling house,
or means of
transportation
or place of
worship, etc.
Theft by clerk
or servant of
property
in
possession of
master.
Theft after
preparation
made for
causing death,
hurt or
restraint in
order to
committing of
theft.
Extortion.

(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or
affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to A. Z signs and delivers the paper to A.
Here, as the paper so signed may be converted into a valuable security. A has committed
extortion.
(e) A threatens Z by sending a message through an electronic device that “Your child
is in my possession, and will be put to death unless you send me one lakh rupees.” A thus
induces Z to give him money. Ahas committed extortion.
(2) Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(3)Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts
to put any person in fear, of any injury, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous
hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any
person in fear of an accusation, against that person or any other, of having committed, or
attempted to commit, an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(7) Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against
that person or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable
with death, or with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, or of having attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of robbery and dacoity
309. (1) In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
(2) Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft,
or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender,
for that end voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful
restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
(3) Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the
presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of
instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other
person, and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver
up the thing extorted.
Explanation.—The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the
other person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Illustrations.
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes,
without Z’s consent. HereAhas committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft,
has voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.
Robbery.

(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z’s purse. Z, in
consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in
fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the extortion in his presence. A has
therefore committed robbery.
(c)Ameets Z and Z’s child on the high road.Atakes the child, and threatens to fling it
down a precipice, unless Z delivers his purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A
has extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to the child who is
there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z.
(d)A obtains property from Z by saying—“Your child is in the hands of my gang, and
will be put to death unless you send us ten thousand rupees”. This is extortion, and punishable
as such; but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his child.
(4) Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be committed
on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen
years.
(5) Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes
hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or attempting to
commit such robbery, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
310. (1)When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery,
or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a
robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or
more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity.
(2) Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(3) If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits
murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death,
or imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(5) Whoever is one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing
dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever belongs to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually
committingdacoity,shallbepunishedwithimprisonmentforlife,orwithrigorousimprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
311. If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly
weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt
to any person, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be
less than seven years.
312. If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed
with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall
not be less than seven years.
Dacoity.
Robbery, or
dacoity, with
attempt to
cause death or
grievous hurt.
Attempt to
commit
robbery or
dacoity when
armed with
deadly weapon.

313. Whoever belongs to any gang of persons associated in habitually committing
theft or robbery, and not being a gang of dacoits, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal misappropriation of property
314. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.
Illustrations.
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, in good faith believing at
the time when he takes it, that the property belongs to himself.A is not guilty of theft; but if
A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his own use, he is
guilty of an offence under this section.
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes
away a book without Z’s express consent. Here, ifAwas under the impression that he had Z’s
implied consent to take the book for the purpose of reading it,Ahas not committed theft. But,
ifAafterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
(c) A and B, being, joint owners of a horse. A takes the horse out of B’s possession,
intending to use it. Here, as A has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly
misappropriate it. But, if A sells the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his own
use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
Explanation 1.—A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation
within the meaning of this section.
Illustration.
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement.
A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a security for a loan,
intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section.
Explanation 2.—A person who finds property not in the possession of any other
person, and takes such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the
owner, does not take or misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he
is guilty of the offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or
has the means of discovering the owner, or before he has used reasonable means to discover
and give notice to the owner and has kept the property a reasonable time to enable the owner
to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question
of fact.
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that
any particular person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he
does not believe it to be his own property, or in good faith believe that the real owner cannot
be found.
Illustrations.
(a)A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, Apicks
up the rupee. Here A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
(b)Afinds a letter on the road, containing a bank-note. From the direction and contents
of the letter he learns to whom the note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an
offence under this section.
(c)Afinds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the person who
has lost the cheque. But the name of the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A
Punishment
for belonging
to gang of
robbers, etc.
Dishonest
misappropriation
of property.

knows that this person can direct him to the person in whose favour the cheque was drawn.
A appropriates the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an
offence under this section.
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. Apicks up the purse with the intention of
restoring it to Z, but afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence
under this section.
(e)Afinds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards discovers
that it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this
section.
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately
without attempting to discover the owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
315. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any property,
knowing that such property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that
person’s decease, and has not since been in the possession of any person legally entitled to
such possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at the time of
such person’s decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, the imprisonment may
extend to seven years.
Illustration.
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money comes
into the possession of any person entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates
it. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of criminal breach of trust
316. (1) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion
over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing
the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied,
which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person
so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.
Explanation 1.—A person, being an employer of an establishment whether
exempted under section 17 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
ProvisionsAct, 1952 or not who deducts the employee’s contribution from the wages payable
to the employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any
law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the
contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution
to the said Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the
amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Explanation 2.—A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’
contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees’ State
Insurance Fund held and administered by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation
established under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 shall be deemed to have been
entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in
the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be
deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a
direction of law as aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the law
which directs him to divide the effects according to the will, and appropriates them to his
own use. Ahas committed criminal breach of trust.
Dishonest
misappropriation
of property
possessed by
deceased
person at the
time of his
death.
Criminal
breach of
trust.
19 of 1952.
34 of 1948.

(b) A is a warehouse-keeper Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a
contract that it shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A
dishonestly sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(c)A, residing in Kolkata, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi.There is an express or implied
contract between A and Z, that all sums remitted by Z to Ashall be invested by A, according
to Z’s direction. Z remits one lakh of rupees to A, with directions toA to invest the same in
Company’s paper. Adishonestly disobeys the directions and employs the money in his own
business. Ahas committed criminal breach of trust.
(d) But ifA, in illustration (c), not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it will be
more for Z’s advantage to hold shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z’s directions, and
buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company’s paper, here,
though Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to bring a civil action against A, on
account of that loss, yet A, not having acted dishonestly, has not committed criminal
breach of trust.
(e)A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by law, or
bound by a contract, express or implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury
all the public money which he holds.Adishonestly appropriates the money.Ahas committed
criminal breach of trust.
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A
dishonestly misappropriates the property. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
(2) Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(3)
Whoever,
being
entrusted
with
property
as
a
carrier,
wharfinger
or
warehouse-keeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being in
any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any dominion over property,
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over
property in his capacity of a public servant or in the way of his business as a banker,
merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that
property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of receiving stolen property
317. (1) Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft or extortion or
robbery or cheating, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of
which criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as stolen property, whether
the transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed,
within or without India, but, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a
person legally entitled to the possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.
(2) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having
reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession
whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have been transferred by the commission of
Stolen
property.

dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, whom he knows or has reason to believe to
belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows or has reason to
believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever habitually receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to
believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonmentfor life, or with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with
property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Of cheating
318. (1) Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person
shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or
omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation
or property, is said to cheat.
Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of
this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and
thus dishonestly induces Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean to
pay. A cheats.
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a
belief that this article was made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly
induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally deceives Z into
believing that the article corresponds with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to
buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no
money, and by which A expects that the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z,
and thereby dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it.Acheats.
(e)A, by pledging as diamonds articles which he knows are not diamonds, intentionally
deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend money. A cheats.
(f) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z
may lend to him and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to
repay it. A cheats.
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain
quantity of indigo plant which he does not intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces
Z to advance money upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the time of
obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and afterwards breaks his contract
and does not deliver it, he does not cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of
contract.
(h)Aintentionally deceives Z into a belief thatAhas performedA’s part of a contract
made with Z, which he has not performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money.
A cheats.
Cheating.

(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such sale
he has no right to the property, sells or mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact
of the previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money
from Z. Acheats.
(2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful
loss to a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was
bound, either by law, or by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver
any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable
security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into
a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
319. (1) A person is said to cheat by personation if he cheats by pretending to be some
other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or another, or representing that he
or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is.
Explanation.—The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real
or imaginary person.
Illustrations.
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats by
personation.
(b)Acheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased.Acheats by personation.
(2) Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property
320. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person,
or transfers or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any
property, intending thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent,
the distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any
other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
321. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself
or to any other person from being made available according to law for payment of his debts
or the debts of such other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
322. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any
deed or instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or any
interest therein, and which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for
such transfer or charge, or relating to the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is
really intended to operate, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Cheating by
personation.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property to
prevent
distribution
among
creditors.
Dishonestly or
fraudulently
preventing
debt being
available for
creditors.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
execution of
deed of transfer
containing
false statement
of
consideration.

323. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself
or any other person, or dishonestly or fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal
thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim to which he is entitled, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Of mischief
324. (1) Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful
loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any
such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or
utility, or affects it injuriously, commits mischief.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should
intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is
sufficient if he intends to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage
to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person or not.
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging
to the person who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
Illustrations.
(a)Avoluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause wrongful
loss to Z.A has committed mischief.
(b) A introduces water into an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to
melt, intending wrongful loss to Z.Ahas committed mischief.
(c)Avoluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of thereby
causing wrongful loss to Z.A has committed mischief.
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy a
debt due from him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z
from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has committed
mischief.
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the
intention of causing damage to the underwriters. A has committed mischief.
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who has
lent money on bottomry on the ship. Ahas committed mischief.
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby to
cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and
knowing that he is likely to cause damage to Z’s crop. A has committed mischief.
(2) Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to any property
including the property of Government or LocalAuthority shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of
twenty thousand rupees and more but less than one lakh rupees shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
(5) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of
one lakh rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Dishonest or
fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property.
Mischief.

(6) Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person
death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
325. Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless
any animal shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
326. Whoever commits mischief by,—
(a) doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a
diminution of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for
human beings or for animals which are property, or for cleanliness or for carrying on
any manufacture, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both;
(b) doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any
public road, bridge, navigable river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable
or less safe for travelling or conveying property, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with
both;
(c) doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an
inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both;
(d) destroying or moving any sign or signal used for navigation of rail, aircraft
or ship or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by any act which renders any
such sign or signal less useful as a guide for navigators, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both;
(e) destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant,
or by any act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both;
(f) fire or any explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby cause, damage to any property including agricultural produce,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(g) fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as
a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
327. (1) Whoever commits mischief to any rail, aircraft, or a decked vessel or any
vessel of a burden of twenty tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that rail, aircraft or
vessel, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such
mischief as is described in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Mischief by
killing or
maiming
animal.
Mischief by
injury,
inundation, fire
or explosive
substance, etc.
Mischief with
intent to
destroy or
make unsafe a
rail, aircraft,
decked vessel
or one of
twenty tons
burden.

328. Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit
theft of any property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property,
or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Of criminal trespass
329. (1) Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of
such property or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains
there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person or with intent to
commit an offence is said to commit criminal trespass.
(2) Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building,
tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a
place for the custody of property, is said to commit house-trespass.
Explanation.—The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser’s body is entering
sufficient to constitute house-trespass.
(3) Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees, or with both.
330. (1) Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to conceal such
house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from the
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit lurking
house-trespass.
(2) A person is said to commit house-breaking who commits house-trespass if he
effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter
described; or if, being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence,
or having committed an offence therein, he quits the house or any part of it in any of the
following ways, namely:––
(a) if he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of
the house-trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass;
(b) if he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other
than himself or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any passage
to which he has obtained access by scaling or climbing over any wall or building;
(c) if he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the
house-trespass has opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any
means by which that passage was not intended by the occupier of the house to be
opened;
(d) if he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the
house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass;
(e) if he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing
an assault, or by threatening any person with assault;
(f) if he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened
against such entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an
abettor of the house-trespass.
Punishment for
intentionally
running vessel
aground or
ashore with
intent to
commit theft,
etc.
Criminal
trespass and
house-trespass.
House-trespass
and housebreaking.

Explanation.—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which
and such house there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house within the
meaning of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z’s house, and
putting his hand through the aperture. This is house-breaking.
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole between decks.
This is house-breaking.
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through a window. This is
house-breaking.
(d) Acommits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having opened
a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking.
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having lifted a
latch by putting a wire through a hole in the door. This is house-breaking.
(f)Afinds the key of Z’s house door, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass by
entering Z’s house, having opened the door with that key. This is house-breaking.
(g) Z is standing in his doorway.Aforces a passage by knocking Z down, and commits
house-trespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y’s doorway. A commits house-trespass by
entering the house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is
house-breaking.
331.(1) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the
committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may
be extended to ten years.
(4) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term
of the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years.
(5) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made
preparation for causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt or of assault or of wrongful
restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description or a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(6) Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before
sunrise, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or
of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment for
house-trespass
or housebreaking.

(7) Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes
grievous hurt to any person or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(8) If, at the time of the committing of lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after
sunset and before sunrise, any person guilty of such offence shall voluntarily cause or
attempt to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned in
committing such lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
332. Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence––
(a) punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine;
(b) punishable with imprisonment for life, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the
imprisonment may be extended to seven years.
333. Whoever commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to
any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for
putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
334. (1) Whoever dishonestly or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or
unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain property,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he
believes to contain property, without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with
intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.
CHAPTER XVIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS
335. A person is said to make a false document or false electronic record—
(A) Who dishonestly or fraudulently—
(i) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document;
(ii) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic
record;
(iii) affixes any electronic signature on any electronic record;
(iv) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the
authenticity of the electronic signature,
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of
document, electronic record or electronic signature was made, signed, sealed,
executed, transmitted or affixed by or by the authority of a person by whom or
House-trespass
in order to
commit
offence.
House-trespass
after
preparation for
hurt, assault or
wrongful
restraint.
Dishonestly
breaking open
receptacle
containing
property.
Making a false
document.

by whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed, executed or
affixed; or
(B) Who without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation
or otherwise, alters a document or an electronic record in any material part thereof,
after it has been made, executed or affixed with electronic signature either by himself or
by any other person, whether such person be living or dead at the time of such
alteration; or
(C) Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or
alter a document or an electronic record or to affix his electronic signature on any
electronic record knowing that such person by reason of unsoundness of mind or
intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception practised upon him, he does not
know the contents of the document or electronic record or the nature of the alteration.
Illustrations.
(a)Ahas a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by Z. A, in order to defraud
B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by
B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b)A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z’s seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance
of an estate from Z toA, with the intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining
from B the purchase-money. Ahas committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any
sum having been inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the
sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery.
(d)Aleaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed byA, without inserting the
sum payable and authorises B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten
thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the
cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B’s authority,
intending to discount it as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its
maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to
suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains these words—“I direct that all my remaining property be equally
divided between A, B and C”.A dishonestly scratches out B’s name, intending that it may be
believed that the whole was left to himself and C.A has committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his order
by writing on the bill the words “Pay to Z or his order” and signing the endorsement. B
dishonestly erases the words “Pay to Z or his order”, and thereby converts the special
endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery.
(h)Asells and conveys an estate to Z.Aafterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate,
executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the
conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B before he
conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the
legatee named by Z, and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will according to his
instructions, induces Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j)Awrites a letter and signs it with B’s name without B’s authority, certifying thatA is
a man of good character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune,
intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as Amade
a false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A has committed forgery.

(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter and signs it in B’s name certifying to A’s
character, intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed forgery in as
much as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter
into an express or implied contract for service.
Explanation 1.—A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations.
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that
the bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in
order that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and
negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B,
knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of
forgery.
(c)Apicks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same
name. A endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was
endorsed by the person to whose order it was payable; here A has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the
seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent
and for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to
defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was granted before the seizure. B,
though he executes the lease in his own name, commits forgery by antedating it.
(e)A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A’s benefit, and
with intent to defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a
promissory note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates the
note, intending that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of
insolvency. A has committed forgery under the first head of the definition.
Explanation 2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person,
intending it to be believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a
deceased person, intending it to be believed that the document was made by the person in
his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Illustration.
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in
the name of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing electronic
signature” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2
of the Information TechnologyAct, 2000.
336. (1) Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any
person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to
enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be
committed, commits forgery.
(2) Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3)Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged
shall be used for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Forgery.
21 of 2000.

(4)Whoever commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged
shall harm the reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
337. Whoever forges a document or an electronic record, purporting to be a record or
proceeding of or in a Court or an identity document issued by Government including voter
identity card or Aadhaar Card, or a register of birth, marriage or burial, or a register kept by
a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting to be made by a public
servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, or to take any
proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “register” includes any list, data or
record of any entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
338. Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or
an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any person to make or
transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to
receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document
purporting to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an
acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any movable property or valuable security, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
339. Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic record, knowing the
same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as
genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description mentioned in
section 337 of this Sanhita, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one
of the description mentioned in section 338, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
340. (1) A false document or electronic record made wholly or in part by forgery is
designated a forged document or electronic record.
(2) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document or electronic
record which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document or electronic record,
shall be punished in the same manner as if he had forged such document or electronic record.
341. (1) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making
an impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any
forgery which would be punishable under section 338 of this Sanhita, or, with such intent,
has in his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery
which would be punishable under any section of this Chapter other than section 338, or, with
such intent, has in his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the
same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever possesses any seal, plate or other instrument knowing the same to be
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Forgery of
record of
Court or of
public register,
etc.
Forgery of
valuable
security, will,
etc.
Having
possession of
document
described in
section 337 or
section 338,
knowing it to
be forged and
intending to
use it as
genuine.
21 of 2000.
Forged
document or
electronic
record and
using it as
genuine.
Making or
possessing
counterfeit
seal, etc., with
intent to
commit
forgery
punishable
under section
338.

(4) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any seal, plate or other
instrument knowing or having reason to believe the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished
in the same manner as if he had made or counterfeited such seal, plate or other instrument.
342. (1) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device
or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in section 338,
intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of
authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who,
with such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any
such device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any material, any device or
mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document or electronic record other than
the documents described in section 338, intending that such device or mark shall be used for
the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or
thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such intent, has in his possession any
material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been counterfeited,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
343. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to
the public or to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or
deface, or secretes or attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or
an authority to adopt a son, or any valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such
document, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
344. Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or acting in the capacity
of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters, mutilates or
falsifies any book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or account which
belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on
behalf of his employer, or wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of
any false entry in, or omits or alters or abets the omission or alteration of any material
particular from or in, any such book, electronic record, paper, writing, valuable security or
account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general
intent to defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying
any particular sum of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on
which the offence was committed.
Of property marks
345. (1)Amark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular person
is called a property mark.
(2) Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other
receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be
believed that the property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained in any
such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a
false property mark.
(3) Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without
intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Counterfeiting
device or
mark used for
authenticating
documents
described in
section 338,
or possessing
counterfeit
marked
material.
Fraudulent
cancellation,
destruction,
etc., of will,
authority to
adopt, or
valuable
security.
Falsification
of accounts.
Property
mark.

346. Whoever removes, destroys, defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.
347. (1) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by any other person shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark
used by a public servant to denote that any property has been manufactured by a particular
person or at a particular time or place, or that the property is of a particular quality or has
passed through a particular office, or that it is entitled to any exemption, or uses as genuine
any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
348. Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the
purpose of counterfeiting a property mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the
purpose of denoting that any goods belong to a person to whom they do not belong, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
349. Whoever sells, or exposes, or has in possession for sale, any goods or things
with a counterfeit property mark affixed to or impressed upon the same or to or upon any
case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall, unless he proves—
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence
against this section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no
reason to suspect the genuineness of the mark; and
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the
information in his power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such
goods or things; or
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both.
350. (1) Whoever makes any false mark upon any case, package or other receptacle
containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause any public servant or any
other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does not contain or that
it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall,
unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever makes use of any false mark in any manner prohibited under sub-section (1)
shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished as if he had
committed the offence under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER XIX
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE, DEFAMATION, ETC.
351. (1) Whoever threatens another by any means, with any injury to his person,
reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is
interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act
which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally
entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal
intimidation.
Tampering
with property
mark with
intent to cause
injury.
Counterfeiting
a property
mark.
Making or
possession of
any instrument
for
counterfeiting
a property
mark.
Selling goods
marked with a
counterfeit
property
mark.
Making a false
mark upon
any receptacle
containing
goods.
Criminal
intimidation.

Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the
person threatened is interested, is within this section.
Illustration.
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to
burn B’s house.Ais guilty of criminal intimidation.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
(3) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by threatening to cause
death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years, or to impute unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine,
or with both.
(4) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous
communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode of the person from
whom the threat comes, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided for the offence under
sub-section (1).
352. Whoever intentionally insults in any manner, and thereby gives provocation to
any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break
the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
353. (1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, false information,
rumour, or report, including through electronic means—
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor or
airman in theArmy, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail
in his duty as such; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or
to any section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence
against the State or against the public tranquillity; or
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of
persons to commit any offence against any other class or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing false
information, rumour or alarming news, including through electronic means, with intent to
create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place
of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings
of enmity, hatred or ill will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or
castes or communities, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship
or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine.
Intentional
insult with
intent to
provoke
breach of
peace.
Statements
conducing to
public
mischief.

Exception.—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section,
when the person making, publishing or circulating any such statement, false information,
rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for believing that such statement, false information,
rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any
such intent as aforesaid.
354. Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything
which that person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally
entitled to do, by inducing or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any
person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered by some act of the offender
an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing which it is the object of the
offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object of the offender to
cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations.
(a) A sits dharna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so
sitting, he renders Z an object of Divine displeasure.Ahas committed the offence defined in
this section.
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A’s own
children, under such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z an object
of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
355. Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in any public place, or in any place
which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such a manner as to cause
annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with
both or with community service.
Of defamation
356. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by
visible representations, makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any
person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will
harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to
defame that person.
Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person,
if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be
hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a
company or an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically,
may amount to defamation.
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that
imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual
character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his
calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that
person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations.
(a) A says— “Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch”; intending to cause it to
be believed that Z did steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the
exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed
that Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Act caused
by inducing
person to
believe that he
will be rendered
an object of
Divine
displeasure.
Misconduct in
public by a
drunken
person.
Defamation.

(c)Adraws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that
Z stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Exception 1.—It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any
person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether
or not it is for the public good is a question of fact.
Exception 2.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or
respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Exception 3.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his
character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustration.
It is not defamation in Ato express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s
conduct in petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting
on a public question, in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any
society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate
for any situation in the efficient discharge of the duties of which the public is interested.
Exception 4.––It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the
proceedings of a Court, or of the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation.—A Magistrate or other officer holding an inquiry in open Court
preliminary to a trial in a Court, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Exception 5.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever
respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court, or
respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or
respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and
no further.
Illustrations.
(a) A says—“I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be
stupid or dishonest”.Ais within this exception if he says this in good faith, in as much as the
opinion which he expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness,
and no further.
(b) But ifAsays—“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to
be a man without veracity”; A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which
expresses of Z’s character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.
Exception 6.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the
merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or
respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such performance,
and no further.
Explanation.—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly
or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the
public.
Illustrations.
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
(b)Aperson who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the
public.
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to
the judgment of the public.

(d) A says of a book published by Z—“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z’s
book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind”. Ais within the exception, if he says this
in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only
so far as it appears in Z’s book, and no further.
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a
weak man and a libertine”. A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which
he expresses of Z’s character is an opinion not founded on Z’s book.
Exception 7.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority,
either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in
good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority
relates.
Illustration.
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court;
a head of a department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders, a parent
censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a school master, whose
authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other
pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker censuring
in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct of such cashier as such cashier are
within this exception.
Exception 8.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any
person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the
subject-matter of accusation.
Illustration.
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the
conduct of Z, a servant, to Z’s master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a
child, to Z’s father, A is within this exception.
Exception 9.— It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another
provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the
person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business—“Sell nothing to Z unless
he pays you ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty”. A is within the exception,
if he has made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.
(b)A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation
on the character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good,
A is within the exception.
Exception 10.— It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person
against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom
it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good.
(2) Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service.
(3) Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe
that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

[PART II—SEC. 1]
Of breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person
357. Whoever, being bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants
of any person who, by reason of youth, or of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily
weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his own
wants, voluntarilyomits so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment ofeither description
for a term which mayextend to three months, or with fine which mayextend tofive thousand
rupees, or with both.
CHAPTERXX
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
358. (1) The Indian Penal Code is herebyrepealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Code referred to in sub-section (1), it shall not
affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Code so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under the Code so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, or punishment incurred in respect of any offences committed
against the Code so repealed; or
(d) anyinvestigation or remedyin respect of anysuch penalty, or punishment; or
(e) anyproceeding, investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty or
punishment as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty may be imposed as if that Code had not
been repealed.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Code shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
this Sanhita.
(4) The mention ofparticular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held toprejudice or
affect the general application of section 6 ofthe General ClausesAct,1897 with regard tothe
effect of the repeal.
Breach of
contract to
attend on and
supply wants
of helpless
person.
Repeal and
savings.
45 of 1860.
10 of 1897.
—————
DIWAKAR SINGH,
Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel to the Govt. of India.
MGIPMRND—531GI(S3)—25-12-2023.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF
PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
Kshitiz
Mohan
Digitally signed by Kshitiz Mohan
DN: c=IN, st=Delhi,
2.5.4.20=e8b886a9336825f4d863142c634f2f25e2e76d2f0b5f069af1775fa98f7ccda
b, postalCode=110002, street=Minto Road New Delhi,
pseudonym=5c90ab0ba7a48905de2428b65504151c,
serialNumber=0a5dc5b84f902a7bf2d6ed41c0c26429a0d4d5848dd23eb18886aba
eea31b247, ou=Deputy Manager, o=Government of India Press, cn=Kshitiz Mohan
Date: 2023.12.25 21:11:37 +05'30'

--- END BNS ---

--- START BNSS ---

 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 54]
No. 54]

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
25th December, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—
THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023
NO. 46 OF 2023
[25th December, 2023.]
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
(2) The provisions of this Sanhita, other than those relating to Chapters IX, XI and
XII thereof, shall not apply—
(a) to the State of Nagaland;
(b) to the tribal areas,
but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of
them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be,
with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in
the notification.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25122023-250884

Explanation.—In this section, "tribal areas" means the territories which immediately
before the 21st day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred
to in paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than those within the
local limits of the municipality of Shillong.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "audio-video electronic means" shall include use of any communication device
for the purposes of video conferencing, recording of processes of identification, search
and seizure or evidence, transmission of electronic communication and for such other
purposes and by such other means as the State Government may, by rules provide;
(b) "bail" means release of a person accused of or suspected of commission of
an offence from the custody of law upon certain conditions imposed by an officer or
Court on execution by such person of a bond or a bail bond;
(c) "bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First
Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and
"non-bailable offence" means any other offence;
(d) "bail bond" means an undertaking for release with surety;
(e) "bond" means a personal bond or an undertaking for release without surety;
(f) "charge" includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads
than one;
(g) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case"
means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or
under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant;
(h) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate,
with a view to his taking action under this Sanhita, that some person, whether known
or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report.
Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses,
after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be
a complaint; and the police officer by whom such report is made shall be deemed to be
the complainant;
(i) "electronic communication" means the communication of any written, verbal,
pictorial information or video content transmitted or transferred (whether from one
person to another or from one device to another or from a person to a device or from
a device to a person) by means of an electronic device including a telephone, mobile
phone, or other wireless telecommunication device, or a computer, or audio-video
player or camera or any other electronic device or electronic form as may be specified
by notification, by the Central Government;
(j) "High Court" means,—
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High
Court for a State has been extended by law, that High Court;
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal
appeal for that territory other than the Supreme Court of India;
(k) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this
Sanhita by a Magistrate or Court;
(l) "investigation" includes all the proceedings under this Sanhita for the
collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a
Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf.
Explanation.—Where any of the provisions of a special Act are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Sanhita, the provisions of the special Act shall prevail;
Definitions.

(m) "judicial proceeding" includes any proceeding in the course of which
evidence is or may be legally taken on oath;
(n) "local jurisdiction", in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area
within which the Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under
this Sanhita and such local area may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of
the State, as the State Government may, by notification, specify;
(o) "non-cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "non-cognizable
case" means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without
warrant;
(p) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(q) "offence" means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the
time being in force and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made
under section 20 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871;
(r) "officer in charge of a police station" includes, when the officer in charge of
the police station is absent from the station-house or unable from illness or other
cause to perform his duties, the police officer present at the station-house who is next
in rank to such officer and is above the rank of constable or, when the State Government
so directs, any other police officer so present;
(s) "place" includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel;
(t) "police report" means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate
under sub-section (3) of section 193;
(u) "police station" means any post or place declared generally or specially by
the State Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by
the State Government in this behalf;
(v) "Public Prosecutor" means any person appointed under section 18, and
includes any person acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor;
(w) "sub-division" means a sub-division of a district;
(x) "summons-case" means a case relating to an offence, and not being a
warrant-case;
(y) "victim" means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by
reason of the act or omission of the accused person and includes the guardian or
legal heir of such victim;
(z) "warrant-case" means a case relating to an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Information
Technology Act, 2000 and the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita.
3. (1) Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in any law, to a Magistrate
without any qualifying words, Magistrate of the first class or a Magistrate of the second
class shall, in relation to any area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class or Judicial Magistrate of the second class, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction
in such area.
Construction
of references.
1 of 1871.
2 of 2000.

(2) Where, under any law, other than this Sanhita, the functions exercisable by a
Magistrate relate to matters,—
(a) which involve the appreciation or shifting of evidence or the formulation of
any decision which exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or detention in
custody pending investigation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending
him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject to the provisions of this Sanhita, be
exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate; or
(b) which are administrative or executive in nature, such as, the granting of a
licence, the suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or
withdrawing from a prosecution, they shall, subject to the provisions of clause (a) be
exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.
4. (1) All offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be investigated,
inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter
contained.
(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the
time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or
otherwise dealing with such offences.
5. Nothing contained in this Sanhita shall, in the absence of a specific provision to
the contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special
jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other
law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES
6. Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, other than this
Sanhita, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:—
(i) Courts of Session;
(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class;
(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and
(iv) Executive Magistrates.
7. (1) Every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions divisions;
and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita, be a district or consist
of districts.
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits
or the number of such divisions and districts.
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any
district into sub-divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub-divisions.
(4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing in a State at the
commencement of this Sanhita, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section.
8. (1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions
division.
(2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the
High Court.
(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction
in a Court of Session.
Trial of
offences under
Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 and other
laws.
Saving.
Classes of
Criminal
Courts.
Territorial
divisions.
Court of
Session.

(4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed by the High Court
to be also an Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case, he may sit for
the disposal of cases at such place or places in the other division as the High Court may
direct.
(5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make
arrangements for the disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or
pending before such Court of Session by an Additional Sessions Judge or if there be no
Additional Sessions Judge, by a Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and
every such Judge or Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.
(6) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or places as the
High Court may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session
is of opinion that it will tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold
its sittings at any other place in the sessions division, it may, with the consent of the
prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the disposal of the case or the examination
of any witness or witnesses therein.
(7) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make orders consistent with this
Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among such Additional Sessions Judges.
(8) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent
application, in the event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional Sessions Judge
or if there be no Additional Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such
Judge or Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Sanhita, "appointment" does not include the
first appointment, posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or
post in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, where under any law, such
appointment, posting or promotion is required to be made by the Government.
9. (1) In every district there shall be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates
of the first class and of the second class, and at such places, as the State Government may,
after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify:
Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court,
establish, for any local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first
class or of the second class to try any particular case or particular class of cases, and where
any such Special Court is established, no other Court of Magistrate in the local area shall
have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of which such Special Court
of Judicial Magistrate has been established.
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.
(3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer
the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class on any member
of the Judicial Service of the State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court.
10. (1) In every district, the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the
powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time
being in force as the High Court may direct.
(3) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any
sub-division as the Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities
specified in this section as occasion requires.
(4) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub-divisional
Judicial Magistrate shall also have and exercise, such powers of supervision and control
over the work of the Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates)
in the sub-division as the High Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.
Courts of
Judicial
Magistrates.
Chief Judicial
Magistrate and
Additional
Chief Judicial
Magistrate,
etc.

11. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Government so to do,
confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or any
of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Sanhita on a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of
cases, in any local area:
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses
such qualification or experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules,
specify.
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed
for such term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special
order, direct.
12. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate may,
from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Magistrates appointed
under section 9 or under section 11 may exercise all or any of the powers with which they
may respectively be invested under this Sanhita:
Provided that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place
within the local area for which it is established.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of
every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.
(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate appointed under section 9 or section 11
extends to an area beyond the district in which he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in
this Sanhita to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to such
Magistrate, throughout the area within his local jurisdiction, be construed, unless the
context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate,
as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in relation to the said district.
13. (1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge;
and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions
Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special
orders, consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among the Judicial
Magistrates subordinate to him.
14. (1) In every district, the State Government may appoint as many persons as it
thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint one of them to be the District
Magistrate.
(2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional
District Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have such of the powers of a District
Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time being in force as may be
directed by the State Government.
(3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District Magistrate becoming vacant,
any officer succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer
shall, pending the orders of the State Government, exercise all the powers and perform all
the duties respectively conferred and imposed by this Sanhita on the District Magistrate.
(4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a
sub-division and may relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so
placed in charge of a sub-division shall be called the Sub-divisional Magistrate.
(5) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such control
and directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the
District Magistrate.
Special Judicial
Magistrates.
Local
Jurisdiction of
Judicial
Magistrates.
Subordination
of Judicial
Magistrates.
Executive
Magistrates.

(6) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring,
under any law for the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police all or any of the
powers of an Executive Magistrate.
15. The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may think fit, Executive
Magistrates or any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or equivalent,
to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for the performance of
particular functions and confer on such Special Executive Magistrates such of the powers
as are conferrable under this Sanhita on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit.
16. (1) Subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate may,
from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Executive Magistrates
may exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested under this Sanhita.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of
every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.
17. (1) All Executive Magistrates shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate, and
every Executive Magistrate (other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in
a sub-division shall also be subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, subject, to the
general control of the District Magistrate.
(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders,
consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution or allocation of business among the
Executive Magistrates subordinate to him.
18. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State Government shall,
after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint
one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution,
appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be:
Provided that for National Capital Territory of Delhi, the Central Government shall,
after consultation with the High Court of Delhi, appoint the Public Prosecutor or Additional
Public Prosecutors for the purposes of this sub-section.
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the
purpose of conducting any case in any district or local area.
(3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may
also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district:
Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for
one district may be appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public
Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another district.
(4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a
panel of names of persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors
or Additional Public Prosecutors for the district.
(5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or
Additional Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names
prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
(6) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (5), where in a State there exists a
regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public
Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting
such Cadre:
Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is
available in such Cadre for such appointment, that Government may appoint a person as
Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of
names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
Special
Executive
Magistrates.
Local
Jurisdiction of
Executive
Magistrates.
Subordination
of Executive
Magistrates.
Public
Prosecutors.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers" means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers
which includes therein the post of Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and
which provides for promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name
called, to that post;
(b) "Prosecuting Officer" means a person, by whatever name called, appointed
to perform the functions of a Public Prosecutor, Special Public Prosecutor, Additional
Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor under this Sanhita.
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional
Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6),
only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes
of any case or class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less
than ten years as a Special Public Prosecutor:
Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to
assist the prosecution under this sub-section.
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the period during which
a person has been in practice as an advocate, or has rendered (whether before or after the
commencement of this Sanhita) service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public
Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name
called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in practice as
an advocate.
19. (1) The State Government shall appoint in every district one or more Assistant
Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates.
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors
for the purpose of conducting any case or class of cases in the Courts of Magistrates.
(3) Without prejudice to provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where no
Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purposes of any particular case, the District
Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of
that case after giving notice of fourteen days to the State Government:
Provided that no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as an Assistant Public
Prosecutor, if he—
(a) has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to
which the accused is being prosecuted; or
(b) is below the rank of Inspector.
20. (1) The State Government may establish,—
(a) a Directorate of Prosecution in the State consisting of a Director of
Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it thinks fit; and
(b) a District Directorate of Prosecution in every district consisting of as many
Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors of Prosecution, as it thinks fit.
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed,—
(a) as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of Prosecution, if he has
been in practice as an advocate for not less than fifteen years or is or has been a
Sessions Judge;
(b) as an Assistant Director of Prosecution, if he has been in practice as an
advocate for not less than seven years or has been a Magistrate of the first class.
Assistant
Public
Prosecutors.
Directorate of
Prosecution.

(3) The Directorate of Prosecution shall be headed by the Director of Prosecution,
who shall function under the administrative control of the Home Department in the State.
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall
be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution; and every Assistant Director of Prosecution
shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution.
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor
appointed by the State Government under sub-section (1) or sub-section (8) of section 18
to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor
appointed by the State Government under sub-section (3) or sub-section (8) of section 18
to conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 19 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution or
the Assistant Director of Prosecution.
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases
in which offences are punishable for ten years or more, or with life imprisonment, or with
death; to expedite the proceedings and to give opinion on filing of appeals.
(8) The powers and functions of the Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be to
examine and scrutinise police report and monitor the cases in which offences are punishable
for seven years or more, but less than ten years, for ensuring their expeditious disposal.
(9) The functions of the Assistant Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases in
which offences are punishable for less than seven years.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (7), (8) and (9), the Director,
Deputy Director or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall have the power to deal with and
be responsible for all proceedings under this Sanhita.
(11) The other powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution, Deputy Directors
of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution and the areas for which each of the
Deputy Directors of Prosecution or Assistant Directors of Prosecution have been appointed
shall be such as the State Government may, by notification, specify.
(12) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the
State while performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.
CHAPTER III
POWER OF COURTS
21. Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita,—
(a) any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be tried by—
(i) the High Court; or
(ii) the Court of Session; or
(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule
to be triable:
Provided that any offence under section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67,
section 68, section 69, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a woman;
(b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in this
behalf in such law, be tried by such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be
tried by—
(i) the High Court; or
(ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule
to be triable.
Courts by
which
offences are
triable.

22. (1) A High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law.
(2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised
by law; but any sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation
by the High Court.
23. (1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by
law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term
exceeding seven years.
(2) The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, or of
both, or of community service.
(3) The Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees, or of both,
or of community service.
Explanation.—"Community service" shall mean the work which the Court may order
a convict to perform as a form of punishment that benefits the community, for which he shall
not be entitled to any remuneration.
24. (1) The Court of a Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in default of
payment of fine as is authorised by law:
Provided that the term—
(a) is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate under section 23;
(b) shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive
sentence, exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is
competent to inflict as punishment for the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in
default of payment of the fine.
(2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive
sentence of imprisonment for the maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 23.
25. (1) When a person is convicted at one trial of two or more offences, the Court may,
subject to the provisions of section 9 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, sentence him
for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such Court is
competent to inflict and the Court shall, considering the gravity of offences, order such
punishments to run concurrently or consecutively.
(2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by
reason only of the aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the
punishment which it is competent to inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the
offender for trial before a higher Court:
Provided that—
(a) in no case shall such person be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer
period than twenty years;
(b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment
which the Court is competent to inflict for a single offence.
(3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive
sentences passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.
26. (1) In conferring powers under this Sanhita, the High Court or the State Government,
as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of their
offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles.
(2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the
person so empowered.
27. Whenever any person holding an office in the service of Government who has
been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under this
Sanhita throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the same
Sentences
which High
Courts and
Sessions Judges
may pass.
Sentences
which
Magistrates
may pass.
Sentence of
imprisonment
in default of
fine.
Sentence in
cases of
conviction of
several
offences at
one trial.
Mode of
conferring
powers.
Powers of
officers
appointed.

nature, within a like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High
Court or the State Government, as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise
directed, exercise the same powers in the local area in which he is so appointed.
28. (1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may withdraw all
or any of the powers conferred by it under this Sanhita on any person or by any officer
subordinate to it.
(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate
may be withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred.
29. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita, the powers and duties of a
Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or performed by his successor-in-office.
(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office, the Sessions Judge
shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita or
of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office.
(3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office of any Magistrate,
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine
by order in writing the Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Sanhita or of any
proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office of such Magistrate.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE AND AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE
30. Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station may
exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be
exercised by such officer within the limits of his station.
31. Every person is bound to assist a Magistrate or police officer reasonably demanding
his aid—
(a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such
Magistrate or police officer is authorised to arrest; or
(b) in the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace; or
(c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any public
property.
32. When a warrant is directed to a person other than a police officer, any other
person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person to whom the warrant is
directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant.
33. (1) Every person, aware of the commission of, or of the intention of any other
person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely:—
(i) sections 103 to 105 (both inclusive);
(ii) sections 111 to 113 (both inclusive);
(iii) sections 140 to 144 (both inclusive);
(iv) sections 147 to 154 (both inclusive) and section 158;
(v) sections 178 to 182 (both inclusive);
(vi) sections 189 and 191;
(vii) sections 274 to 280 (both inclusive);
(viii) section 307;
Withdrawal of
powers.
Powers of
Judges and
Magistrates
exercisable by
their
successors-inoffice.
Powers of
superior
officers of
police.
Public when to
assist
Magistrates
and police.
Aid to person,
other than
police officer,
executing
warrant.
Public to give
information
of certain
offences.

(ix) sections 309 to 312 (both inclusive);
(x) sub-section (5) of section 316;
(xi) sections 326 to 328 (both inclusive); and
(xii) sections 331 and 332,
shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie
upon the person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police
officer of such commission or intention.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term "offence" includes any act committed at
any place out of India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.
34. (1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every
person residing in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the
officer in charge of the nearest police station, whichever is nearer, any information which he
may possess respecting—
(a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor
of stolen property in or near such village;
(b) the resort to any place within, or the passage through, such village of any
person whom he knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a robber, escaped convict or
proclaimed offender;
(c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any
non-bailable offence or any offence punishable under section 189 and section 191 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or
of any death under suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or near such village
of any corpse or part of a corpse, in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion
that such a death has occurred or the disappearance from such village of any person
in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that a non-bailable offence has
been committed in respect of such person;
(e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near
such village any act which, if committed in India, would be an offence punishable
under any of the following sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely,
103, 105, 111, 112, 113, 178 to 181 (both inclusive), 305, 307, 309 to 312 (both inclusive),
clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, 331or 332;
(f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime
or the safety of person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by
general or special order made with the previous sanction of the State Government,
has directed him to communicate information.
(2) In this section,—
(i) "village" includes village lands;
(ii) the expression "proclaimed offender" includes any person proclaimed as an
offender by any Court or authority in any territory in India to which this Sanhita does
not extend, in respect of any act which if committed in the territories to which this
Sanhita extends, would be an offence punishable under any of the offence punishable
with imprisonment for ten years or more or with imprisonment for life or with death
under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(iii) the words "officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village"
means a member of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every
officer or other person appointed to perform any function connected with the
administration of the village.
Duty of
officers
employed in
connection
with affairs of
a village to
make certain
report.

CHAPTER V
ARREST OF PERSONS
35. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; or
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years
or which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the following
conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint,
information, or suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police
officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured,
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is
not required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing
for not making the arrest; or
(c) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed
a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
more than seven years whether with or without fine or with death sentence and the
police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that information that such person
has committed the said offence; or
(d) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Sanhita or by
order of the State Government; or
(e) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected
to be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an
offence with reference to such thing; or
(f) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has
escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
(g) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed
Forces of the Union; or
(h) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has
been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India
which, if committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for
When police
may arrest
without
warrant.

which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended
or detained in custody in India; or
(i) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under
sub-section (5) of section 394; or
(j) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received
from another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be
arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it
appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the
officer who issued the requisition.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 39, no person concerned in a non-cognizable
offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been
received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except
under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.
(3) The police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required
under sub-section (1) issue a notice directing the person against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear before him or at such other
place as may be specified in the notice.
(4) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to
comply with the terms of the notice.
(5) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall
not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be
recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested.
(6) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is
unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have
been passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the
notice.
(7) No arrest shall be made without prior permission of an officer not below the rank of
Deputy Superintendent of Police in case of an offence which is punishable for imprisonment
of less than three years and such person is infirm or is above sixty years of age.
36. Every police officer while making an arrest shall—
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will
facilitate easy identification;
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be—
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the
person arrested or a respectable member of the locality where the arrest is
made;
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member
of his family, that he has a right to have a relative or a friend or any other person
named by him to be informed of his arrest.
37. The State Government shall—
(a) establish a police control room in every district and at State level;
(b) designate a police officer in every district and in every police station, not
below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police who shall be responsible for
maintaining the information about the names and addresses of the persons arrested,
nature of the offence with which charged, which shall be prominently displayed in
any manner including in digital mode in every police station and at the district
headquarters.
Procedure of
arrest and
duties of
officer making
arrest.
Designated
police officer.

38. When any person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled
to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.
39. (1) When any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or
has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses on demand of such
officer to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has
reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or
residence may be ascertained.
(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall
be released on a bond or bail bond, to appear before a Magistrate if so required:
Provided that if such person is not resident in India, the bail bond shall be secured by
a surety or sureties resident in India.
(3) If the true name and residence of such person is not ascertained within
twenty-four hours from the time of arrest or if he fails to execute the bond or bail bond, or,
if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall forthwith be forwarded to the nearest
Magistrate having jurisdiction.
40. (1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his
presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and,
without unnecessary delay, but within six hours from such arrest, shall make over or cause
to be made over any person so arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police
officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in custody to the nearest police station.
(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of
sub-section (1) of section 35, a police officer shall take him in custody.
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non-cognizable offence, and
he refuses on the demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name
or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with
under the provisions of section 39; but if there is no sufficient reason to believe that he has
committed any offence, he shall be at once released.
41. (1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether
Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person
to arrest the offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to
bail, commit the offender to custody.
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the
arrest, in his presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is
competent at the time and in the circumstances to issue a warrant.
42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 35 and sections 39 to 41 (both
inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for anything done
or purported to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining
the consent of the Central Government.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Force charged
with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if for the expression
"Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were
substituted.
Right of
arrested
person to
meet an
advocate of
his choice
during
interrogation.
Arrest on
refusal to give
name and
residence.
Arrest by
private person
and procedure
on such arrest.
Arrest by
Magistrate.
Protection of
members of
Armed Forces
from arrest.

43. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission
to the custody by word or action:
Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate
to the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be
presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police officer
is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for making her
arrest.
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade
the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the
arrest.
(3) The police officer may, keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence,
use handcuff while making the arrest of a person or while producing such person
before the court who is a habitual or repeat offender, or who escaped from custody, or
who has committed offence of organised crime, terrorist act, drug related crime, or
illegal possession of arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of
coins and currency-notes, human trafficking, sexual offence against children, or offence
against the State.
(4) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not
accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.
(5) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and
before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer
shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the Magistrate of the
first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be
made.
44. (1) If any person acting under a warrant of arrest, or any police officer having
authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has entered into, or
is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on
demand of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress
thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein.
(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful
in any case for a person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may
issue, but cannot be obtained without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of
escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search therein, and in order to effect an
entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or
place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification
of his authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise
obtain admittance:
Provided that if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female
(not being the person to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public,
such person or police officer shall, before entering such apartment, give notice to such
female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every reasonable facility for
withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it.
(3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open
any outer or inner door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any
other person who, having lawfully entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained
therein.
Arrest how
made.
Search of place
entered by
person sought
to be arrested.

45. A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting without warrant any person
whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India.
46. The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is necessary to
prevent his escape.
47. (1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant shall
forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other
grounds for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person
accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to
be released on bail and that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.
48. (1) Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita shall
forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is
being held to any of his relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or
nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such information and also to
the designated police officer in the district.
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under
sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought to the police station.
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall
be made in a book to be kept in the police station in such form as the State Government may,
by rules, provide.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced,
to satisfy himself that the requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been
complied with in respect of such arrested person.
49. (1) Whenever,—
(i) a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which does not
provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail
but the person arrested cannot furnish bail; and
(ii) a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant,
and cannot legally be admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail,
the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police
officer to whom he makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in
safe custody all articles, other than necessary wearing-apparel, found upon him and where
any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the articles taken in
possession by the police officer shall be given to such person.
(2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be
made by another female with strict regard to decency.
50. The police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita may,
immediately after the arrest is made, take from the person arrested any offensive weapons
which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so taken to the Court or officer
before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Sanhita to
produce the person arrested.
51. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a
nature and alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as
to the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner,
acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid
and under his direction, to make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably
Pursuit of
offenders into
other
jurisdictions.
No unnecessary
restraint.
Person
arrested to be
informed of
grounds of
arrest and of
right to bail.
Obligation of
person making
arrest to
inform about
arrest, etc., to
relative or
friend.
Search of
arrested
person.
Power to seize
offensive
weapons.
Examination
of accused by
medical
practitioner at
request of
police officer.

necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence, and to use such
force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the
examination shall be made only by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical
practitioner.
(3) The registered medical practitioner shall, without any delay, forward the examination
report to the investigating officer.
Explanation.—In this section and sections 52 and 53,—
(a) "examination" shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen,
swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail
clippings by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling and
such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks necessary in a
particular case;
(b) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses
any medical qualification recognised under the National Medical Commission
Act, 2019 and whose name has been entered in the National Medical Register or a
State Medical Register under that Act.
52. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of rape or an
attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination
of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for
a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local
authority and in the absence of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometres
from the place where the offence has been committed, by any other registered medical
practitioner, acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good
faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested person
and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without
any delay, examine such person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following
particulars, namely:—
(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was
brought;
(ii) the age of the accused;
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused;
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA
profiling; and
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be
noted in the report.
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without any delay, forward the report to
the investigating officer, who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 193 as
part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that section.
53. (1) When any person is arrested, he shall be examined by a medical officer in the
service of the Central Government or a State Government, and in case the medical officer is
not available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:
Examination
of person
accused of
rape by
medical
practitioner.
Examination
of arrested
person by
medical
officer.
30 of 2019.

Provided that if the medical officer or the registered medical practitioner is of the
opinion that one more examination of such person is necessary, he may do so:
Provided further that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the
body shall be made only by or under the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case
the female medical officer is not available, by a female registered medical practitioner.
(2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested
person shall prepare the record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or
marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the approximate time when such injuries or
marks may have been inflicted.
(3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such
examination shall be furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as
the case may be, to the arrested person or the person nominated by such arrested person.
54. Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his
identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of
investigation of such offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the
officer in charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself to
identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may deem fit:
Provided that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically
disabled, such process of identification shall take place under the supervision of a Magistrate
who shall take appropriate steps to ensure that such person identifies the person arrested
using methods that person is comfortable with and the identification process shall be
recorded by any audio-video electronic means.
55. (1) When any officer in charge of a police station or any police officer making an
investigation under Chapter XIII requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without a
warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be arrested without
a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required to make the arrest an order in writing,
specifying the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is
to be made and the officer so required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person
to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so required by such person, shall show him
the order.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a
person under section 35.
56. It shall be the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to take
reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.
57. A police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary
delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person
arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge
of a police station.
58. No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a
longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period
shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under section 187, exceed
twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to
the Magistrate's Court, whether having jurisdiction or not.
59. Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if
he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without
warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been
admitted to bail or otherwise.
Identification
of person
arrested.
Procedure
when police
officer deputes
subordinate to
arrest without
warrant.
Health and
safety of
arrested person.
Person
arrested to be
taken before
Magistrate or
officer in
charge of
police station.
Person
arrested not to
be detained
more than
twenty-four
hours.
Police to
report
apprehensions.

60. No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except
on his bond, or bail bond, or under the special order of a Magistrate.
61. (1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose
custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any place in
India.
(2) The provisions of section 44 shall apply to arrests under sub-section (1) although
the person making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer
having authority to arrest.
62. No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita
or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest.
CHAPTER VI
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE
A.—Summons
63. Every summons issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be,—
(i) in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by
such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall
bear the seal of the Court; or
(ii) in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall
bear the image of the seal of the Court or digital signature.
64. (1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to such rules as
the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other
public servant:
Provided that the police station or the registrar in the Court shall maintain a register to
enter the address, email address, phone number and such other details as the State
Government may, by rules, provide.
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned,
by delivering or tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons:
Provided that summons bearing the image of Court's seal may also be served by
electronic communication in such form and in such manner, as the State Government may,
by rules, provide.
(3) Every person on whom a summons is so served personally shall, if so required by
the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate.
65. (1) Service of a summons on a company or corporation may be effected by serving
it on the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation, or by
letter sent by registered post addressed to the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer
of the company or corporation in India, in which case the service shall be deemed to have
been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post.
Explanation.—In this section, "company" means a body corporate and "corporation"
means an incorporated company or other body corporate registered under the Companies
Act, 2013 or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
(2) Service of a summons on a firm or other association of individuals may be effected
by serving it on any partner of such firm or association, or by letter sent by registered post
addressed to such partner, in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected
when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post.
Discharge of
person
apprehended.
Power, on
escape, to
pursue and
retake.
Arrest to be
made strictly
according to
Sanhita.
Form of
summons.
Summons how
served.
Service of
summons on
corporate
bodies, firms,
and societies.
18 of 2013.
21 of 1860.

66. Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found,
the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult
member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left
shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other
duplicate.
Explanation.—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this
section.
67. If service cannot by the exercise of due diligence be effected as provided in
section 64, section 65 or section 66, the serving officer shall affix one of the duplicates of the
summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person
summoned ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it
thinks fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served or order fresh service
in such manner as it considers proper.
68. (1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the Government, the
Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in
which such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be
served in the manner provided by section 64, and shall return it to the Court under his
signature with the endorsement required by that section.
(2) Such signature shall be evidence of due service.
69. When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be served at any place
outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a
Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the person summoned resides, or is, to be there
served.
70. (1) When a summons issued by a Court is served outside its local jurisdiction, and
in any case where the officer who has served a summons is not present at the hearing of the
case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has been
served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provided
by section 64 or section 66) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with
whom it was left, shall be admissible in evidence, and the statements made therein shall be
deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved.
(2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the
summons and returned to the Court.
(3) All summons served through electronic communication under sections 64 to 71
(both inclusive) shall be considered as duly served and a copy of such summons shall be
attested and kept as a proof of service of summons.
71. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sections of this Chapter,
a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the
issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by electronic
communication or by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
(2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an
endorsement purporting to be made by a postal employee that the witness refused to take
delivery of the summons has been received or on the proof of delivery of summons under
sub-section (3) of section 70 by electronic communication to the satisfaction of the Court,
the Court issuing summons may deem that the summons has been duly served.
B.—Warrant of arrest
72. (1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing,
signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court.
Service when
persons
summoned
cannot be
found.
Procedure
when service
cannot be
effected as
before
provided.
Service on
Government
servant.
Service of
summons
outside local
limits.
Proof of
service in such
cases and
when serving
officer not
present.
Service of
summons on
witness.
Form of warrant
of arrest and
duration.

(2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which
issued it, or until it is executed.
73. (1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may in its discretion
direct by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bail bond with sufficient
sureties for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise
directed by the Court, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security
and shall release such person from custody.
(2) The endorsement shall state—
(a) the number of sureties;
(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is
issued, are to be respectively bound;
(c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court.
(3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is
directed shall forward the bond to the Court.
74. (1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police officers;
but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no
police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such
person or persons shall execute the same.
(2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed
by all, or by any one or more of them.
75. (1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may direct a
warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict,
proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non-bailable offence and is
evading arrest.
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall
execute it if the person for whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other
property under his charge.
(3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be
made over with the warrant to the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken
before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, unless security is taken under section 73.
76. A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any other police
officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or
endorsed.
77. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the
substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the
warrant.
78. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall (subject to
the provisions of section 73 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the person
arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person:
Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive
of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court.
79. A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.
Power to
direct security
to be taken.
Warrants to
whom
directed.
Warrant may
be directed to
any person.
Warrant
directed to
police officer.
Notification
of substance
of warrant.
Person
arrested to be
brought before
Court without
delay.
Where
warrant may
be executed.

80. (1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the local jurisdiction of the Court
issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to a police officer within its
jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District
Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
it is to be executed; and the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner
shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to be executed in the manner
hereinbefore provided.
(2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub-section (1) shall forward, along with the
warrant, the substance of the information against the person to be arrested together with
such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable the Court acting under section 83 to
decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person.
81. (1) When a warrant directed to a police officer is to be executed beyond the local
jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it for endorsement either
to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of
a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed.
(2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and such
endorsement shall be sufficient authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is
directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so required, assist such officer in
executing such warrant.
(3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by obtaining the
endorsement of the Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant
is to be executed will prevent such execution, the police officer to whom it is directed may
execute the same without such endorsement in any place beyond the local jurisdiction of
the Court which issued it.
82. (1) When a warrant of arrest is executed outside the district in which it was issued,
the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued the warrant is within thirty kilometres
of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of
Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arrest was
made, or unless security is taken under section 73, be taken before such Magistrate or
District Superintendent or Commissioner.
(2) On the arrest of any person referred to in sub-section (1), the police officer shall
forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and the place where the arrested person
is being held to the designated police officer in the district and to such officer of another
district where the arrested person normally resides.
83. (1) The Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner
of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person intended by the Court which
issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court:
Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and willing to give
bail bond to the satisfaction of such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner,
or a direction has been endorsed under section 73 on the warrant and such person is ready
and willing to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate, District
Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail bond or security, as the case may be,
and forward the bond, to the Court which issued the warrant:
Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it shall be lawful for the Chief
Judicial Magistrate (subject to the provisions of section 480), or the Sessions Judge, of the
district in which the arrest is made on consideration of the information and the documents
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 80, to release such person on bail.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking
security under section 73.
Warrant
forwarded for
execution
outside
jurisdiction.
Warrant
directed to
police officer
for execution
outside
jurisdiction.
Procedure on
arrest of
person against
whom warrant
issued.
Procedure by
Magistrate
before whom
such person
arrested is
brought.

C.—Proclamation and attachment
84. (1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that
any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing
himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written
proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less
than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation.
(2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:—
(i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village
in which such person ordinarily resides;
(b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in
which such person ordinarily resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or
village;
(c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the
Court-house;
(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be
published in a daily newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily
resides.
(3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the
proclamation was duly published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of
sub-section (2), shall be conclusive evidence that the requirements of this section have
been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.
(4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person
accused of an offence which is made punishable with imprisonment of ten years or more, or
imprisonment for life or with death under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under any
other law for the time being in force, and such person fails to appear at the specified place
and time required by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks
fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and make a declaration to that effect.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made
by the Court under sub-section (4) as they apply to the proclamation published under
sub-section (1).
85. (1) The Court issuing a proclamation under section 84 may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of
any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person:
Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied,
by affidavit or otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be
issued,—
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local
jurisdiction of the Court,
it may order the attachment of property simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation.
(2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such
person within the district in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any
property belonging to such person without such district when endorsed by the District
Magistrate within whose district such property is situate.
(3) If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other movable property, the
attachment under this section shall be made—
(a) by seizure; or
Proclamation
for person
absconding.
Attachment
of property of
person
absconding.

(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such property to the
proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.
(4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this
section shall, in the case of land paying revenue to the State Government, be made through
the Collector of the district in which the land is situate, and in all other cases—
(a) by taking possession; or
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on delivery of property
to the proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.
(5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live-stock or is of a perishable
nature, the Court may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case
the proceeds of the sale shall abide the order of the Court.
(6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall
be the same as those of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
86. The Court may, on the written request from a police officer not below the rank of
the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police, initiate the process of requesting
assistance from a Court or an authority in the contracting State for identification, attachment
and forfeiture of property belonging to a proclaimed person in accordance with the procedure
provided in Chapter VIII.
87. (1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the attachment of, any
property attached under section 85, within six months from the date of such attachment, by
any person other than the proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector
has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under
section 85, the claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in
whole or in part:
Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this
sub-section may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his
legal representative.
(2) Claims or objections under sub-section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court
by which the order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of
property attached under an order endorsed under sub-section (2) of section 85, in the Court
of the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district in which the attachment is made.
(3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is
preferred or made:
Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he
may make it over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him.
(4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an
order under sub-section (1) may, within a period of one year from the date of such order,
institute a suit to establish the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute;
but subject to the result of such suit, if any, the order shall be conclusive.
88. (1) If the proclaimed person appears within the time specified in the proclamation,
the Court shall make an order releasing the property from the attachment.
(2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the
proclamation, the property under the attachment shall be at the disposal of the State
Identification
and
attachment of
property of
proclaimed
person.
Claims and
objections to
attachment.
Release, sale
and
restoration of
attached
property.
5 of 1908.

Government; but it shall not be sold until the expiration of six months from the date of the
attachment and until any claim preferred or objection made under section 87 has been
disposed of under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and natural decay, or the
Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which cases
the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit.
(3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any person whose property is
or has been at the disposal of the State Government under sub-section (2), appears voluntarily
or is apprehended and brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached,
or the Court to which such Court is subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such
Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for the purpose of avoiding execution of
the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to enable him to attend
within the time specified therein, such property, or, if the same has been sold, the net
proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and
the residue of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs incurred in consequence
of the attachment, be delivered to him.
89. Any person referred to in sub-section (3) of section 88, who is aggrieved by any
refusal to deliver property or the proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to
which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the first-mentioned Court.
D.—Other rules regarding processes
90. A Court may, in any case in which it is empowered by this Sanhita to issue a
summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its reasons in writing, a
warrant for his arrest—
(a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of the same but
before the time fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has
absconded or will not obey the summons; or
(b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been
duly served in time to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable
excuse is offered for such failure.
91. When any person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any
Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer
may require such person to execute a bond or bail bond for his appearance in such Court, or
any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial.
92. When any person who is bound by any bond or bail bond taken under this
Sanhita to appear before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may
issue a warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before him.
93. The provisions contained in this Chapter relating to summons and warrant, and
their issue, service and execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and
every warrant of arrest issued under this Sanhita.
CHAPTER VII
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS
A.—Summons to produce
94. (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that
the production of any document, electronic communication, including communication
devices, which is likely to contain digital evidence or other thing is necessary or desirable
for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita
Appeal from
order rejecting
application
for restoration
of attached
property.
Issue of
warrant in lieu
of, or in
addition to,
summons.
Power to take
bond or bail
bond for
appearance.
Arrest on
breach of bond
or bail bond
for
appearance.
Provisions of
this Chapter
generally
applicable to
summons and
warrants of
arrest.
Summons to
produce
document or
other thing.

by or before such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons or such officer may, by
a written order, either in physical form or in electronic form, require the person in whose
possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, to attend and produce it, or
to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order.
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document, or other
thing shall be deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or
thing to be produced instead of attending personally to produce the same.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed—
(a) to affect sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 or
the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891; or
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, or other document or any parcel or thing in the
custody of the postal authority.
95. (1) If any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a postal authority is, in the
opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court
wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
Sanhita, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal authority to deliver the document,
parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs.
(2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate,
whether Executive or Judicial, or of any Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent
of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal authority to cause search
to be made for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District
Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub-section (1).
B.—Search-warrants
96. (1) Where—
(a) any Court has reason to believe that a person to whom a summons order
under section 94 or a requisition under sub-section (1) of section 95 has been, or
might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required
by such summons or requisition; or
(b) such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of
any person; or
(c) the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under this Sanhita will be served by a general search or inspection,
it may issue a search-warrant; and the person to whom such warrant is directed, may search
or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions hereinafter contained.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the particular place or part
thereof to which only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with
the execution of such warrant shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any Magistrate other than a
District Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document,
parcel or other thing in the custody of the postal authority.
97. (1) If a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first
class, upon information and after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe
that any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen property, or for the deposit, sale or
production of any objectionable article to which this section applies, or that any such
objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police
officer above the rank of a constable—
(a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place;
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant;
Procedure as
to letters.
13 of 1891.
When searchwarrant may
be issued.
Search of
place
suspected to
contain stolen
property,
forged
documents,
etc.

(c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he
reasonably suspects to be stolen property or objectionable article to which this
section applies;
(d) to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same
on the spot until the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of
it in some place of safety;
(e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in
such place who appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any
such property or article knowing or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be
stolen property or, as the case may be, objectionable article to which this section
applies.
(2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are—
(a) counterfeit coin;
(b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Coinage Act, 2011, or brought
into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force issued under
section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962;
(c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;
(d) forged documents;
(e) false seals;
(f) obscene objects referred to in section 294 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023;
(g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles
mentioned in clauses (a) to (f).
98. (1) Where—
(a) any newspaper, or book; or
(b) any document,
wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication
of which is punishable under section 152 or section 196 or section 197 or section 294 or
section 295 or section 299 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the State Government may,
by notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the
newspaper containing such matter, and every copy of such book or other document to be
forfeited to Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same wherever
found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer not below
the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any premises where any
copy of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably
suspected to be.
(2) In this section and in section 99,—
(a) "newspaper" and "book" have the same meanings as in the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867;
(b) "document" includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible
representation.
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in
any Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 99.
99. (1) Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in
respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has been made under section 98, may, within two
months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette of such declaration, apply to the
High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of the newspaper, or
Power to
declare certain
publications
forfeited and
to issue
searchwarrants for
same.
11 of 2011.
25 of 1867.
Application to
High Court to
set aside
declaration of
forfeiture.
52 of 1962.

the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not contain
any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98.
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more
Judges, be heard and determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three
Judges and where the High Court consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench
shall be composed of all the Judges of that High Court.
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy
of such newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency
of the words, signs or visible representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of
which the declaration of forfeiture was made.
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the
book or other document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any
such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98, set aside the declaration of
forfeiture.
(5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special
Bench, the decision shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges.
100. If any District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first
class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances that the
confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search-warrant, and the person to
whom such warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search
shall be made in accordance therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken
before a Magistrate, who shall make such order as in the circumstances of the case seems
proper.
101. Upon complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a
woman, or a female child for any unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional
Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may make an order for the immediate restoration
of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to her parent, guardian or other person
having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel compliance with such order, using
such force as may be necessary.
C.—General provisions relating to searches
102. The provisions of sections 32, 72, 74, 76, 79, 80 and 81 shall, so far as may be,
apply to all search-warrants issued under section 96, section 97, section 98 or section 100.
103. (1) Whenever any place liable to search or inspection under this Chapter is
closed, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on demand of the
officer or other person executing the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allow him
free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein.
(2) If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person
executing the warrant may proceed in the manner provided by sub-section (2) of section 44.
(3) Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing
about his person any article for which search should be made, such person may be searched
and if such person is a woman, the search shall be made by another woman with strict
regard to decency.
(4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to
make it shall call upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality
in which the place to be searched is situate or of any other locality if no such inhabitant of
the said locality is available or is willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness
the search and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do.
(5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of all things seized in the
course of such search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be
Search for
persons
wrongfully
confined.
Power to
compel
restoration of
abducted
females.
Direction,
etc., of
searchwarrants.
Persons in
charge of
closed place to
allow search.

prepared by such officer or other person and signed by such witnesses; but no person
witnessing a search under this section shall be required to attend the Court as a witness of
the search unless specially summoned by it.
(6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every
instance, be permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of the list prepared under this
section, signed by the said witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person.
(7) When any person is searched under sub-section (3), a list of all things taken
possession of shall be prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person.
(8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and
witness a search under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing
delivered or tendered to him, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under
section 222 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
104. When, in the execution of a search-warrant at any place beyond the local
jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the things for which search is made,
are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under the provisions
hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant,
unless such place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court,
in which case the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and,
unless there be good cause to the contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising
them to be taken to such Court.
D.—Miscellaneous
105. The process of conducting search of a place or taking possession of any property,
article or thing under this Chapter or under section 185, including preparation of the list of
all things seized in the course of such search and seizure and signing of such list by
witnesses, shall be recorded through any audio-video electronic means preferably mobile
phone and the police officer shall without delay forward such recording to the District
Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
106. (1) Any police officer may seize any property which may be alleged or suspected
to have been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of
the commission of any offence.
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall
forthwith report the seizure to that officer.
(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure
to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be
conveniently transported to the Court, or where there is difficulty in securing proper
accommodation for the custody of such property, or where the continued retention of the
property in police custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of investigation,
he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing a bond undertaking to produce
the property before the Court as and when required and to give effect to the further orders
of the Court as to the disposal of the same:
Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to speedy
and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown
or absent and the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith
be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions of
sections 503 and 504 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of
such sale.
107. (1) Where a police officer making an investigation has reason to believe that any
property is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of a criminal activity or from
the commission of any offence, he may, with the approval of the Superintendent of Police or
Commissioner of Police, make an application to the Court or the Magistrate exercising
Disposal of
things found
in search
beyond
jurisdiction.
Recording of
search and
seizure
through audiovideo
electronic
means.
Power of
police officer
to seize
certain
property.
Attachment,
forfeiture or
restoration of
property.

jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence or commit for trial or try the case, for the
attachment of such property.
(2) If the Court or the Magistrate has reasons to believe, whether before or after
taking evidence, that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, the Court or the
Magistrate may issue a notice upon such person calling upon him to show cause within a
period of fourteen days as to why an order of attachment shall not be made.
(3) Where the notice issued to any person under sub-section (2) specifies any property
as being held by any other person on behalf of such person, a copy of the notice shall also
be served upon such other person.
(4) The Court or the Magistrate may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the
show-cause notice issued under sub-section (2) and the material fact available before such
Court or Magistrate and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such
person or persons, may pass an order of attachment, in respect of those properties which
are found to be the proceeds of crime:
Provided that if such person does not appear before the Court or the Magistrate or
represent his case before the Court or Magistrate within a period of fourteen days specified
in the show-cause notice, the Court or the Magistrate may proceed to pass the ex parte
order.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if the Court or the
Magistrate is of the opinion that issuance of notice under the said sub-section would
defeat the object of attachment or seizure, the Court or Magistrate may by an interim order
passed ex parte direct attachment or seizure of such property, and such order shall remain
in force till an order under sub-section (6) is passed.
(6) If the Court or the Magistrate finds the attached or seized properties to be
the proceeds of crime, the Court or the Magistrate shall by order direct the District
Magistrate to rateably distribute such proceeds of crime to the persons who are affected by
such crime.
(7) On receipt of an order passed under sub-section (6), the District Magistrate shall,
within a period of sixty days distribute the proceeds of crime either by himself or authorise
any officer subordinate to him to effect such distribution.
(8) If there are no claimants to receive such proceeds or no claimant is ascertainable
or there is any surplus after satisfying the claimants, such proceeds of crime shall stand
forfeited to the Government.
108. Any Magistrate may direct a search to be made in his presence of any place for
the search of which he is competent to issue a search-warrant.
109. Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any document or thing produced before
it under this Sanhita.
110. (1) Where a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends (hereafter in this
section referred to as the said territories) desires that—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document
or other thing, or to produce it; or
Magistrate
may direct
search in his
presence.
Power to
impound
document,
etc., produced.
Reciprocal
arrangements
regarding
processes.

(d) a search-warrant,
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,—
(i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the
said territories, it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise,
to the presiding officer of that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons
referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has been so served, the provisions of section 70
shall apply in relation to such summons as if the presiding officer of the Court to
whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories;
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have
been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country or place
for service or execution of summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter
in this section referred to as the contracting State), it may send such summons or
warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, and
send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf.
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document
or other thing, or to produce it; or
(d) a search-warrant,
issued by—
(I) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories;
(II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State,
it shall cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a summons or warrant received
by it from another Court in the said territories for service or execution within its local
jurisdiction; and where—
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as
possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by sections 82 and 83;
(ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in the search shall, so
far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by
section 104:
Provided that in a case where a summons or search-warrant received from a contracting
State has been executed, the documents or things produced or things found in the search
shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the summons or search-warrant through such
authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
CHAPTER VIII
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY
111. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "contracting State" means any country or place outside India in respect of
which arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government
of such country through a treaty or otherwise;
(b) "identifying" includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived
from, or used in, the commission of an offence;
Definitions.

(c) "proceeds of crime" means any property derived or obtained directly or
indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity (including crime involving
currency transfers) or the value of any such property;
(d) "property" means property and assets of every description whether corporeal
or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets derived or used in the
commission of an offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of crime;
(e) "tracing" means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement,
title or ownership of property.
112. (1) If, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an application is made by
the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that
evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue
a letter of request to a Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with
such request to examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the course of such examination
and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing
which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so
taken or collected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court
issuing such letter.
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government
may specify in this behalf.
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section (1)
shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation under this
Sanhita.
113. (1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or
place outside India competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination
of any person or production of any document or thing in relation to an offence under
investigation in that country or place, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit—
(i) forward the same to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he
may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon the person before him and
record his statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or
(ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon
investigate into the offence in the same manner,
as if the offence had been committed within India.
(2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub-section (1), or authenticated copies
thereof or the thing so collected, shall be forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as
the case may be, to the Central Government for transmission to the Court or the authority
issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government may deem fit.
114. (1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, desires that a warrant
for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it shall be
executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such
form to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case
may be, shall cause the same to be executed.
(2) If , in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an offence, an application
is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating
officer that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required
in connection with such investigation or inquiry and the Court is satisfied that such
attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or warrant, in duplicate, against the said
Letter of
request to
competent
authority for
investigation
in a country
or place
outside India.
Letter of
request from a
country or
place outside
India to a
Court or an
authority for
investigation
in India.
Assistance in
securing
transfer of
persons.

person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf, to cause the same to be served or executed.
(3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for
arrest of any person requiring him to attend or attend and produce a document or other
thing in that Court or before any other investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or
Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it is the warrant received
by it from another Court in India for execution within its local limits.
(4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section (3) is a
prisoner in India, the Court in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions
as that Court or Government deems fit.
(5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) is a prisoner in a contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the
conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to India are complied with and such
prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central Government
may direct in writing.
115. (1) Where a Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property
obtained by any person is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from
the commission of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of such
property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive).
(2) Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture of any property
under sub-section (1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the
Court may issue a letter of request to a Court or an authority in the contracting State for
execution of such order.
(3) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an
authority in a contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India,
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence
committed in that contracting State, the Central Government may forward such letter of
request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in accordance with the provisions of
sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being
in force.
116. (1) The Court shall, under sub-section (1), or on receipt of a letter of request
under sub-section (3) of section 115, direct any police officer not below the rank of
Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.
(2) The steps referred to in sub-section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or
survey in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in
any bank or public financial institutions or any other relevant matters.
(3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section (2) shall be carried
out by an officer mentioned in sub-section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by
the said Court in this behalf.
117. (1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or investigation under section 116
has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such inquiry or investigation
is being conducted is likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner which
will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property and
where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment
directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the
prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served
on the person concerned.
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is
confirmed by an order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made.
Assistance in
relation to
orders of
attachment or
forfeiture of
property.
Identifying
unlawfully
acquired
property.
Seizure or
attachment of
property.

118. (1) The Court may appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property
is situated, or any other officer that may be nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform
the functions of an Administrator of such property.
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall receive and manage the
property in relation to which the order has been made under sub-section (1) of section 117
or under section 120 in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by
the Central Government.
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may
direct, to dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government.
119. (1) If as a result of the inquiry, investigation or survey under section 116, the
Court has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, it may
serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling
upon him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate the source of
income, earnings or assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such
property, the evidence on which he relies and other relevant information and particulars,
and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the case may be, should not be
declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government.
(2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) to any person specifies any property as
being held on behalf of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be
served upon such other person.
120. (1) The Court may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the show-cause
notice issued under section 119 and the material available before it and after giving to the
person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property specified in the
notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable opportunity of
being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are
proceeds of crime:
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds
any property specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does
not appear before the Court or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days
specified in the show-cause notice, the Court may proceed to record a finding under this
sub-section ex parte on the basis of evidence available before it.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the
show-cause notice are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such
properties, then, it shall be lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the
best of its judgment, are proceeds of crime and record a finding accordingly under
sub-section (1).
(3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property
is proceeds of crime, such property shall stand forfeited to the Central Government free
from all encumbrances.
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under
this section, then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies
Act, 2013 or the Articles of Association of the company, forthwith register the Central
Government as the transferee of such shares.
121. (1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property stands forfeited to
the Central Government under section 120 and it is a case where the source of only a part of
such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an order
giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market
value of such part.
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub-section (1), the person affected
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Management
of properties
seized or
forfeited under
this Chapter.
Notice of
forfeiture of
property.
Forfeiture of
property in
certain cases.
Fine in lieu of
forfeiture.
18 of 2013.

(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub-section (1), within such
time as may be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of
forfeiture under section 120 and thereupon such property shall stand released.
122. Where after the making of an order under sub-section (1) of section 117 or the
issue of a notice under section 119, any property referred to in the said order or notice is
transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of the
proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited
to the Central Government under section 120, then, the transfer of such property shall be
deemed to be null and void.
123. Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central Government
from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting
State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case may be,
sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
124. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal
arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or
qualifications as are specified in the said notification.
CHAPTER IX
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
125. (1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of the first class convicts
a person of any of the offences specified in sub-section (2) or of abetting any such offence
and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keeping the
peace, the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute
a bond or bail bond, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding three years, as it
thinks fit.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are—
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter XI of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, other than an offence punishable under sub-section (1) of section 193
or section 196 or section 197 thereof;
(b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using criminal force or
committing mischief;
(c) any offence of criminal intimidation;
(d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to
cause, a breach of the peace.
(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond or bail bond so
executed shall become void.
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court
when exercising its powers of revision.
126. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that any person is likely
to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any wrongful act
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity and is of
opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter
provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a
bond or bail bond for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding one year, as the
Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate
when either the place where the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within
Certain
transfers to be
null and void.
Procedure in
respect of
letter of
request.
Application of
this Chapter.
Security for
keeping peace
on conviction.
Security for
keeping peace
in other cases.

his local jurisdiction or there is within such jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a
breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any wrongful act as aforesaid
beyond such jurisdiction.
127. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his
local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such jurisdiction,—
(i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates
or attempts to disseminate or abets the dissemination of,—
(a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 152 or
section 196 or section 197 or section 299 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
(b) any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties which amounts to criminal intimidation or
defamation under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys,
sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any other manner puts into
circulation any obscene matter such as is referred to in section 294 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate
may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should
not be ordered to execute a bond or bail bond, for his good behaviour for such period, not
exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the editor, proprietor,
printer or publisher of any publication registered under, and edited, printed and published
in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 with
reference to any matter contained in such publication except by the order or under the
authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in
this behalf.
128. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local
jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that there is reason to
believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate
may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should
not be ordered to execute a bond or bail bond for his good behaviour for such period, not
exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
129. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local
jurisdiction a person who—
(a) is by habit a robber, house-breaker, thief, or forger; or
(b) is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing the same to have been
stolen; or
(c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal
of stolen property; or
(d) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, the
offence of kidnapping, abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence
punishable under Chapter X of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or under
section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 181 of that Sanhita; or
(e) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of,
offences, involving a breach of the peace; or
(f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of—
Security for
good
behaviour
from persons
disseminating
certain
matters.
Security for
good
behaviour
from
suspected
persons.
Security for
good
behaviour
from habitual
offenders.
25 of 1867.

(i) any offence under one or more of the following Acts, namely:—
(a) the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;
(b) the Foreigners Act, 1946;
(c) the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952;
(d) the Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
(e) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955;
(f) the Customs Act, 1962;
(g) the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; or
(ii) any offence punishable under any other law providing for the
prevention of hoarding or profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of
corruption; or
(g) is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without
security hazardous to the community,
such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show
cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bail bond, for his good behaviour for such
period, not exceeding three years, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
130. When a Magistrate acting under section 126, section 127, section 128 or
section 129, deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he
shall make an order in writing, setting forth the substance of the information received, the
amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be in force and the number of
sureties, after considering the sufficiency and fitness of sureties.
131. If the person in respect of whom such order is made is present in Court, it shall
be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him.
132. If such person is not present in Court, the Magistrate shall issue a summons
requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing the officer
in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court:
Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police
officer or upon other information (the substance of which report or information shall be
recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason to fear the commission of a breach of the
peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise than by the
immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue a warrant for his
arrest.
133. Every summons or warrant issued under section 132 shall be accompanied by a
copy of the order made under section 130, and such copy shall be delivered by the officer
serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under,
the same.
134. The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense with the personal
attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to
execute a bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear
by an advocate.
135. (1) When an order under section 130 has been read or explained under
section 131 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before
a Magistrate in compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under
section 132, the Magistrate shall proceed to inquire into the truth of the information upon
which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as may appear necessary.
23 of 1940.
34 of 2006.
19 of 1952.
10 of 1955.
22 of 1955.
52 of 1962.
31 of 1946.
Order to be
made.
Procedure in
respect of
person present
in Court.
Summons or
warrant in
case of person
not so
present.
Copy of order
to accompany
summons or
warrant.
Power to
dispense with
personal
attendance.
Inquiry as to
truth of
information.

(2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner
hereinafter prescribed for conducting trial and recording evidence in summons-cases.
(3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under
sub-section (1), the Magistrate, if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for
the prevention of a breach of the peace or disturbance of the public tranquillity or the
commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 130 has been made to
execute a bond or bail bond, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour until the
conclusion of the inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond or bail bond is
executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is concluded:
Provided that—
(a) no person against whom proceedings are not being taken under section 127,
section 128, or section 129 shall be directed to execute a bond or bail bond for
maintaining good behaviour;
(b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to the amount thereof or as to the
provision of sureties or the number thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability,
shall not be more onerous than those specified in the order under section 130.
(4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is a habitual offender or is
so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without security hazardous to
the community may be proved by evidence of general repute or otherwise.
(5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under
inquiry, they may be dealt with in the same or separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall
think just.
(6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months
from the date of its commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings
under this Chapter shall, on the expiry of the said period, stand terminated unless, for
special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs:
Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the
proceeding against that person, unless terminated earlier, shall stand terminated on the
expiry of a period of six months of such detention.
(7) Where any direction is made under sub-section (6) permitting the continuance of
proceedings, the Sessions Judge may, on an application made to him by the aggrieved
party, vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was not based on any special reason or
was perverse.
136. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or
maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the
inquiry is made should execute a bond or bail bond, the Magistrate shall make an order
accordingly:
Provided that—
(a) no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different from, or of
an amount larger than, or for a period longer than, that specified in the order made
under section 130;
(b) the amount of every bond or bail bond shall be fixed with due regard to the
circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive;
(c) when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a child, the bond
shall be executed only by his sureties.
137. If, on an inquiry under section 135, it is not proved that it is necessary for
keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in
respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an
Order to give
security.
Discharge of
person
informed
against.

entry on the record to that effect, and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of
the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in custody, shall discharge him.
138. (1) If any person, in respect of whom an order requiring security is made under
section 125 or section 136, is at the time such order is made, sentenced to, or undergoing a
sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence
on the expiration of such sentence.
(2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the
Magistrate, for sufficient reason, fixes a later date.
139. The bond or bail bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep
the peace or to be of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission
or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever
it may be committed, is a breach of the bond or bail bond.
140. (1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any
surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground
that such surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bail bond:
Provided that before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either
himself hold an inquiry on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be
held and a report to be made thereon by a Magistrate subordinate to him.
(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the
surety and to the person by whom the surety was offered and shall, in making the inquiry,
record the substance of the evidence adduced before him.
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either
before him or before a Magistrate deputed under sub-section (1), and the report of such
Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bail bond, he
shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety and
recording his reasons for so doing:
Provided that before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been
accepted, the Magistrate shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the
person for whom the surety is bound to appear or to be brought before him.
141. (1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 125 or section 136
does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such
security is to be given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned,
be committed to prison, or, if he is already in prison, be detained in prison until such period
expires or until within such period he gives the security to the Court or Magistrate who
made the order requiring it;
(b) if any person after having executed a bond or bail bond for keeping the peace in
pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 136, is proved, to the satisfaction of
such Magistrate or his successor-in-office, to have committed breach of the bond or bail
bond, such Magistrate or successor-in-office may, after recording the grounds of such
proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the period
of the bond or bail bond and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment
or forfeiture to which the said person may be liable in accordance with law.
(2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period
exceeding one year, such Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as
aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained in prison pending the orders of the
Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, before
such Court.
(3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate
any further information or evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned
Commencement
of period for
which security
is required.
Contents of
bond.
Power to
reject sureties.
Imprisonment
in default of
security.

person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, may pass such order on the case as it
thinks fit:
Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give
security shall not exceed three years.
(4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or
more persons in respect of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions
Judge under sub-section (2) such reference shall also include the case of any other of such
persons who has been ordered to give security, and the provisions of sub-sections (2)
and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except that the
period (if any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was
ordered to give security.
(5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him
under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge and upon such
transfer, such Additional Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge
under this section in respect of such proceedings.
(6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer
the matter to the Court or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such
Court or Magistrate.
(7) Imprisonment for failure to give security for keeping the peace shall be simple.
(8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the
proceedings have been taken under section 127, be simple, and, where the proceedings
have been taken under section 128 or section 129, be rigorous or simple as the Court or
Magistrate in each case directs.
142. (1) Whenever the District Magistrate in the case of an order passed by an
Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case
is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter may
be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, he may order such
person to be discharged.
(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this
Chapter, the High Court or Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other
Court, District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under
section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case, may make an order reducing
the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been
required.
(3) An order under sub-section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either
without conditions or upon any conditions which such person accepts:
Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for
which such person was ordered to give security has expired.
(4) The State Government may prescribe, by rules, the conditions upon which a
conditional discharge may be made.
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of
District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under
section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case by whom the order of discharge
was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same.
(6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under sub-section (5),
such person may be arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be
produced before the District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive
Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case.
Power to
release
persons
imprisoned for
failing to give
security.

(7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original
order for the unexpired portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed
or ordered to be detained (such portion being deemed to be a period equal to the period
between the date of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date on which, except
for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), District Magistrate,
in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief
Judicial Magistrate in any other case may remand such person to prison to undergo such
unexpired portion.
(8) A person remanded to prison under sub-section (7) shall, subject to the provisions
of section 141, be released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the
original order for the unexpired portion aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such
order was made, or to its or his successor.
(9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be
recorded in writing, cancel any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed
under this Chapter by any order made by it, and District Magistrate, in the case of an order
passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in
any other case may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order
or under the order of any other Court in his district.
(10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of another person
ordered to execute a bond under this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making
such order to cancel the bond and on such application being made, the Court shall issue a
summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety is bound to
appear or to be brought before it.
143. (1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant has been issued
under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 140 or under sub-section (10) of section 142,
appears or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel
the bond or bail bond executed by such person and shall order such person to give, for the
unexpired portion of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same description as the
original security.
(2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 139 to 142 (both inclusive) be
deemed to be an order made under section 125 or section 136, as the case may be.
CHAPTER X
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS
144. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself; or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate child, whether married or not, unable to maintain
itself; or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality
or injury unable to maintain itself; or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person
to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother,
at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the
Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a female child referred to in
clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied
that the husband of such female child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
Security for
unexpired
period of
bond.
Order for
maintenance
of wives,
children and
parents.

Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding
regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person
to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father or
mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate considers reasonable,
and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed
of within sixty days from the date of the service of notice of the application to such person.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, "wife" includes a woman who has
been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.
(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of
proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the
application for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order,
any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the
amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for
the whole or any part of each month's allowance for the maintenance or the interim
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, remaining unpaid after the
execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until
payment if sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under
this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of
one year from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her
living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds
of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such
offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.
Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a
mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the interim
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, from her husband under this section if she is
living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband,
or if they are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section
is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband,
or that they are living separately by mutual consent, the Magistrate shall cancel the order.
145. (1) Proceedings under section 144 may be taken against any person in any
district—
(a) where he is; or
(b) where he or his wife resides; or
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of
the illegitimate child; or
(d) where his father or mother resides.
Procedure.

(2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person
against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his
personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his advocate, and shall be recorded
in the manner prescribed for summons-cases:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that the person against whom an order for
payment of maintenance is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully
neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and determine the
case ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an
application made within three months from the date thereof subject to such terms including
terms as to payment of costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and
proper.
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 144 shall have power to make
such order as to costs as may be just.
146. (1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under
section 144 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered
under the same section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim
maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim
maintenance, as the case may be.
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that in consequence of any decision of a
competent Civil Court, any order made under section 144 should be cancelled or varied, he
shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary the same accordingly.
(3) Where any order has been made under section 144 in favour of a woman who has
been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is
satisfied that—
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order
as from the date of her remarriage;
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received,
whether before or after the date of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under
any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, was payable on such divorce,
cancel such order,—
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date
on which such order was made;
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for
which maintenance has been actually paid by the husband to the woman;
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had
voluntarily surrendered her rights to maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case
may be, after her divorce, cancel the order from the date thereof.
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by
any person, to whom a monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or
any of them has been ordered to be paid under section 144, the Civil Court shall take into
account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such person as monthly allowance
for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them, as the case may be, in pursuance
of the said order.
147. A copy of the order of maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of
proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment to the person in whose
favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the allowance for the
maintenance or the allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as
the case may be, is to be paid; and such order may be enforced by any Magistrate in any
Alteration in
allowance.
Enforcement
of order of
maintenance.

place where the person against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being satisfied
as to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance, or as the case may
be, expenses, due.
CHAPTER XI
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY
A.—Unlawful assemblies
148. (1) Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station or, in the
absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector,
may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to
cause a disturbance of the public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of
the members of such assembly to disperse accordingly.
(2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without
being so commanded, it conducts itself in such a manner as to show a determination not to
disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police officer referred to in sub-section (1), may
proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the assistance of any person,
not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the purpose of
dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form
part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law.
149. (1) If any assembly referred to in sub-section (1) of section 148 cannot otherwise
be dispersed, and it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the
District Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate authorised by him, who is present,
may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces.
(2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons
belonging to the armed forces to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces
under his command, and to arrest and confine such persons forming part of it as the
Executive Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to
disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law.
(3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such requisition in such manner
as he thinks fit, but in so doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person
and property, as may be consistent with dispersing the assembly and arresting and detaining
such persons.
150. When the public security is manifestly endangered by any such assembly and
no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or gazetted officer
of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his
command, and may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to disperse
such assembly or that they may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting
under this section, it becomes practicable for him to communicate with an Executive
Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the Magistrate,
as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action.
151. (1) No prosecution against any person for any act purporting to be done under
section 148, section 149 or section 150 shall be instituted in any Criminal Court except—
(a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer
or member of the armed forces;
(b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case.
(2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections
in good faith;
Dispersal of
assembly by
use of civil
force.
Use of armed
forces to
disperse
assembly.
Power of
certain armed
force officers
to disperse
assembly.
Protection
against
prosecution
for acts done
under sections
148, 149 and
150.

(b) no person doing any act in good faith in compliance with a requisition under
section 148 or section 149;
(c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 150 in good faith;
(d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order which he
was bound to obey,
shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence.
(3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter,—
(a) the expression "armed forces" means the army, naval and air forces, operating
as land forces and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating;
(b) "officer", in relation to the armed forces, means a person commissioned,
gazetted or in pay as an officer of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned
officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non-commissioned officer and a non-gazetted
officer;
(c) "member", in relation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed
forces other than an officer.
B.—Public nuisances
152. (1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other
Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on
receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence
(if any) as he thinks fit, considers—
(a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed from any
public place or from any way, river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the
public; or
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or
merchandise, is injurious to the health or physical comfort of the community, and that
in consequence such trade or occupation should be prohibited or regulated or such
goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or
(c) that the construction of any building, or, the disposal of any substance, as
is likely to occasion conflagration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or
(d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it
is likely to fall and thereby cause injury to persons living or carrying on business in
the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in consequence the removal, repair or
support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such tree, is
necessary; or
(e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or public place
should be fenced in such manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise
disposed of,
such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person causing such obstruction
or nuisance, or carrying on such trade or occupation, or keeping any such goods or
merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such building, tent, structure, substance,
Conditional
order for
removal of
nuisance.

tank, well or excavation, or owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a time to be
fixed in the order—
(i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as may
be directed, such trade or occupation, or to remove such goods or merchandise, or to
regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may be directed; or
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the disposal
of such substance; or
(iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or to remove or
support such trees; or
(v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or
(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner
provided in the said order,
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other Executive Magistrate
subordinate to him at a time and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the
manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be made absolute.
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question
in any Civil Court.
Explanation.—A "public place" includes also property belonging to the State,
camping grounds and grounds left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes.
153. (1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against whom it is
made, in the manner herein provided for service of summons.
(2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation published in
such manner as the State Government may, by rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be
stuck up at such place or places as may be fittest for conveying the information to such
person.
154. The person against whom such order is made shall—
(a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the order, the act
directed thereby; or
(b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same;
and such appearance or hearing may be permitted through audio-video conferencing.
155. If the person against whom an order is made under section 154 does not perform
such act or appear and show cause, he shall be liable to the penalty specified in that behalf
in section 223 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the order shall be made absolute.
156. (1) Where an order is made under section 152 for the purpose of preventing
obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place,
the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order
was made, question him as to whether he denies the existence of any public right in respect
of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding
under section 157, inquire into the matter.
(2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support
of such denial, he shall stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right
has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he finds that there is no such evidence, he
shall proceed as laid down in section 157.
(3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub-section (1),
Service or
notification of
order.
Person to
whom order is
addressed to
obey or show
cause.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
section 154.
Procedure
where
existence of
public right is
denied.

failed to deny the existence of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having
made such denial, has failed to adduce reliable evidence in support thereof, shall not in the
subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial.
157. (1) If the person against whom an order under section 152 is made appears and
shows cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a
summons-case.
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to
such modification as he considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be
made absolute without modification or, as the case may be, with such modification.
(3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the
case:
Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed, as soon as
possible, within a period of ninety days, which may be extended for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, to one hundred and twenty days.
158. The Magistrate may, for the purposes of an inquiry under section 156 or
section 157—
(a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or
(b) summon and examine an expert.
159. (1) Where the Magistrate directs a local investigation by any person under
section 158, the Magistrate may—
(a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary
for his guidance;
(b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the
local investigation shall be paid.
(2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case.
(3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 158, the
Magistrate may direct by whom the costs of such summoning and examination shall be
paid.
160. (1) When an order has been made absolute under section 155 or section 157, the
Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person against whom the order was made,
and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within the time to be
fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he shall be liable to the
penalty provided by section 223 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be
performed, and may recover the costs of performing it, either by the sale of any building,
goods or other property removed by his order, or by the distress and sale of any other
movable property of such person within or without such Magistrate's local jurisdiction, and
if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment
and sale when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the property to
be attached is found.
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith under this section.
161. (1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 152 considers that immediate
measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the
public, he may issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as
is required to obviate or prevent such danger or injury pending the determination of the
matter.
Procedure
where person
against whom
order is made
under section
152 appears
to show cause.
Power of
Magistrate to
direct local
investigation
and
examination
of an expert.
Power of
Magistrate to
furnish written
instructions,
etc.
Procedure on
order being
made absolute
and
consequences
of
disobedience.
Injunction
pending
inquiry.

(2) In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may
himself use, or cause to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to
prevent such injury.
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under
this section.
162. A District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive
Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of Police empowered by the State Government or the
District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public
nuisance, as defined in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or any special or local law.
C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger
163. (1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional
Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government
in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate
prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating
the material facts of the case and served in the manner provided by section 153, direct any
person to abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property
in his possession or under his management, if such Magistrate considers that such direction
is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person
lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the public
tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray.
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the
circumstances do not admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against
whom the order is directed, be passed ex parte.
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons
residing in a particular place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting
a particular place or area.
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from
the making thereof:
Provided that if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing
danger to human life, health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by
notification, direct that an order made by a Magistrate under this section shall remain in
force for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which the order
made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in the said
notification.
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person
aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made under this section by himself or any Magistrate
subordinate to him or by his predecessor-in-office.
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any
person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4).
(7) Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) is received, the
Magistrate, or the State Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an
early opportunity of appearing before him or it, either in person or by an advocate and
showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State Government, as the case
may be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons
for so doing.
D.—Disputes as to immovable property
164. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police
officer or upon other information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists
concerning any land or water or the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he
shall make an order in writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring
the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his Court in person or by an advocate on a
Magistrate
may prohibit
repetition or
continuance
of public
nuisance.
Power to issue
order in urgent
cases of
nuisance or
apprehended
danger.
Procedure
where dispute
concerning
land or water
is likely to
cause breach
of peace.

specified date and time, and to put in written statements of their respective claims as
respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression "land or water" includes buildings,
markets, fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such
property.
(3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Sanhita for the
service of summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least
one copy shall be published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the
subject of dispute.
(4) The Magistrate shall, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the
parties to a right to possess the subject of dispute, peruse the statements so put in, hear the
parties, receive all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence,
if any, as he thinks necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties
was, at the date of the order made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the
subject of dispute:
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and
wrongfully dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a
police officer or other information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and
before the date of his order under sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed
as if that party had been in possession on the date of his order under sub-section (1).
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other
person interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and
in such case the Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon
shall be stayed, but, subject to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under
sub-section (1) shall be final.
(6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the
proviso to sub-section (4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject of
dispute, he shall issue an order declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof
until evicted therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all disturbance of such possession
until such eviction; and when he proceeds under the proviso to sub-section (4), may
restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed;
(b) the order made under this sub-section shall be served and published in the manner
laid down in sub-section (3).
(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal
representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon
continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a
deceased party for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be
representatives of the deceased party shall be made parties thereto.
(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the
subject of dispute in a proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to
speedy and natural decay, he may make an order for the proper custody or sale of such
property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such order for the disposal of
such property, or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks fit.
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this
section, on the application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to
attend or to produce any document or thing.
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the
Magistrate to proceed under section 126.

165. (1) If the Magistrate at any time after making the order under sub-section (1) of
section 164 considers the case to be one of emergency, or if he decides that none of the
parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 164, or if he is unable to
satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute,
he may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of
the parties thereto with regard to the person entitled to the possession thereof:
Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is
satisfied that there is no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the
subject of dispute.
(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may, if no receiver in
relation to such subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such
arrangements as he considers proper for looking after the property or if he thinks fit,
appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the control of the Magistrate, all the
powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently appointed in relation to
the subject of dispute by any Civil Court, the Magistrate—
(a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the
subject of dispute to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter
discharge the receiver appointed by him;
(b) may make such other incidental or consequential orders as may be just.
166. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from the report of a police
officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists
regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local jurisdiction, whether
such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall make an order in writing, stating
the grounds of his being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to
attend his Court in person or by an advocate on a specified date and time and to put in
written statements of their respective claims.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "land or water"
has the meaning given to it in sub-section (2) of section 164.
(2) The Magistrate shall peruse the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive all
such evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider the effect of such
evidence, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and, if possible, decide
whether such right exists; and the provisions of section 164 shall, so far as may be, apply in
the case of such inquiry.
(3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order
prohibiting any interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an
order for the removal of any obstruction in the exercise of any such right:
Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of
the year, unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt
under sub-section (1) of the report of a police officer or other information leading to the
institution of the inquiry, or where the right is exercisable only at particular seasons or on
particular occasions, unless the right has been exercised during the last of such seasons or
on the last of such occasions before such receipt.
(4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164 the
Magistrate finds that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he
may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been
commenced under sub-section (1), and when in any proceedings commenced under
sub-section (1) the Magistrate finds that the dispute should be dealt with under
section 164, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they
had been commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164.
Power to
attach subject
of dispute and
to appoint
receiver.
Dispute
concerning
right of use of
land or water.
5 of 1908.

167. (1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 164,
section 165 or section 166, a District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may depute
any Magistrate subordinate to him to make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such
written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and may declare by whom the
whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid.
(2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case.
(3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under
section 164, section 165 or section 166, the Magistrate passing a decision may direct by
whom such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any other party to the proceeding,
and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any expenses
incurred in respect of witnesses and of advocates' fees, which the Court may consider
reasonable.
CHAPTER XII
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE
168. Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, and shall, to
the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence.
169. Every police officer receiving information of a design to commit any cognizable
offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is subordinate,
and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of
any such offence.
170. (1) A police officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence may
arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so designing, if
it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.
(2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody for a period
exceeding twenty-four hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is
required or authorised under any other provisions of this Sanhita or of any other law for the
time being in force.
171. A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent any injury attempted
to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or
injury of any public landmark, buoy or other mark used for navigation.
172. (1) All persons shall be bound to conform to the lawful directions of a police
officer given in fulfilment of any of his duty under this Chapter.
(2) A police officer may detain or remove any person resisting, refusing, ignoring or
disregarding to conform to any direction given by him under sub-section (1) and may either
take such person before a Magistrate or, in petty cases, release him as soon as possible
within a period of twenty-four hours.
CHAPTER XIII
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE
173. (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence,
irrespective of the area where the offence is committed, may be given orally or by electronic
communication to an officer in charge of a police station, and if given—
(i) orally, it shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read
over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced
to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it;
(ii) by electronic communication, it shall be taken on record by him on being
signed within three days by the person giving it,
Local inquiry.
Police to
prevent
cognizable
offences.
Information
of design to
commit
cognizable
offences.
Arrest to
prevent
commission of
cognizable
offences.
Prevention of
injury to
public
property.
Persons bound
to conform to
lawful
directions of
police.
Information
in cognizable
cases.

and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form
as the State Government may by rules prescribe in this behalf:
Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence
under section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70,
section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78, section 79 or
section 124 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or
attempted, then such information shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any
woman officer:
Provided further that—
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under section 64,
section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71,
section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78, section 79 or section 124 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is
temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information
shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report
such offence or at a convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of an
interpreter or a special educator, as the case may be;
(b) the recording of such information shall be videographed;
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a
Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 183 as soon as possible.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith,
free of cost, to the informant or the victim.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 175, on receipt of
information relating to the commission of any cognizable offence, which is made punishable
for three years or more but less than seven years, the officer in charge of the police station
may with the prior permission from an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent
of Police, considering the nature and gravity of the offence,—
(i) proceed to conduct preliminary enquiry to ascertain whether there exists a
prima facie case for proceeding in the matter within a period of fourteen days; or
(ii) proceed with investigation when there exists a prima facie case.
(4) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police
station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1), may send the substance of
such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if
satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, shall
either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer
subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Sanhita, and such officer shall have all
the powers of an officer in charge of the police station in relation to that offence failing
which such aggrieved person may make an application to the Magistrate.
174. (1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the
commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter or
cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in
such form as the State Government may by rules prescribe in this behalf, and,—
(i) refer the informant to the Magistrate;
(ii) forward the daily diary report of all such cases fortnightly to the Magistrate.
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a
Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case for trial.
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of
the investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a
police station may exercise in a cognizable case.
Information
as to noncognizable
cases and
investigation
of such cases.

(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable,
the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences
are non-cognizable.
175. (1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate,
investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within
the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of
Chapter XIV:
Provided that considering the nature and gravity of the offence, the Superintendent
of Police may require the Deputy Superintendent of Police to investigate the case.
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in
question on the ground that the case was one which such officer was not empowered under
this section to investigate.
(3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 210 may, after considering the application
supported by an affidavit made under sub-section (4) of section 173, and after making such
inquiry as he thinks necessary and submission made in this regard by the police officer,
order such an investigation as above-mentioned.
(4) Any Magistrate empowered under section 210, may, upon receiving a complaint
against a public servant arising in course of the discharge of his official duties, order
investigation, subject to—
(a) receiving a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from
the officer superior to him; and
(b) after consideration of the assertions made by the public servant as to the
situation that led to the incident so alleged.
176. (1) If, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a police
station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under
section 175 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon a police report and shall proceed in
person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being below such rank as the
State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to
the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take
measures for the discovery and arrest of the offender:
Provided that—
(a) when information as to the commission of any such offence is given against
any person by name and the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a
police station need not proceed in person or depute a subordinate officer to make an
investigation on the spot;
(b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that there is no
sufficient ground for entering on an investigation, he shall not investigate the case:
Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of
the victim shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and
as far as practicable by a woman police officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or
near relatives or social worker of the locality and such statement may also be recorded
through any audio-video electronic means including mobile phone.
(2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the first proviso to
sub-section (1), the officer in charge of the police station shall state in his report the
reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub-section by him, and,
forward the daily diary report fortnightly to the Magistrate and in the case mentioned in
Police
officer's power
to investigate
cognizable
case.
Procedure for
investigation.

clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify to the informant, if any,
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government.
(3) On receipt of every information relating to the commission of an offence which is
made punishable for seven years or more, the officer in charge of a police station shall, from
such date, as may be notified within a period of five years by the State Government in this
regard, cause the forensic expert to visit the crime scene to collect forensic evidence in the
offence and also cause videography of the process on mobile phone or any other electronic
device:
Provided that where forensic facility is not available in respect of any such offence,
the State Government shall, until the facility in respect of that matter is developed or made
in the State, notify the utilisation of such facility of any other State.
177. (1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 176 shall, if the State
Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State
Government, by general or special order, appoints in that behalf.
(2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the
police station as he thinks fit, and shall, after recording such instructions on such report,
transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate.
178. The Magistrate, on receiving a report under section 176, may direct an
investigation, or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to
him to proceed, to hold a preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the
manner provided in this Sanhita.
179. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order
in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his
own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so
required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of
sixty years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness
shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such person resides:
Provided further that if such person is willing to attend at the police station, such
person may be permitted so to do.
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment
by the police officer of the reasonable expenses of every person, attending under
sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence.
180. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police
officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order,
prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any
person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.
(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put
to him by such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency
to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course
of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true
record of the statement of each such person whose statement he records:
Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by
audio-video electronic means:
Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under
section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71,
Report how
submitted.
Power to hold
investigation
or preliminary
inquiry.
Police
officer's power
to require
attendance of
witnesses.
Examination
of witnesses
by police.

section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78, section 79 or section 124 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, shall be
recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer.
181. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person
making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as
hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at
the time when such statement was made:
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial
whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if
duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the
prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 148 of the
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; and when any part of such statement is so used, any
part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose
only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within
the provisions of clause (a) of section 26 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; or to
affect the provisions of the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 23 of that Adhiniyam.
Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred
to in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and
otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether
any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.
182. (1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or cause to
be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 22 of
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
(2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise,
any person from making in the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement
which he may be disposed to make of his own free will:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (4)
of section 183.
183. (1) Any Magistrate of the District in which the information about commission of
any offence has been registered, may, whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record
any confession or statement made to him in the course of an investigation under this
Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards but
before the commencement of the inquiry or trial:
Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub-section may also be
recorded by audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person
accused of an offence:
Provided further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any
power of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.
(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person
making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used
as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession unless,
upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made
voluntarily.
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the
Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not
authorise the detention of such person in police custody.
Statements to
police and use
thereof.
No inducement
to be offered.
Recording of
confessions
and
statements.

(4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 316 for
recording the examination of an accused person and shall be signed by the person making
the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record to
the following effect:—
"I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that,
if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and
I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my presence and
hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be correct,
and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.
(Signed) A. B.
Magistrate.".
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be
recorded in such manner hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the
opinion of the Magistrate, best fitted to the circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate
shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is so recorded.
(6) (a) In cases punishable under section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67,
section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77,
section 78, section 79 or section 124 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Magistrate
shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been committed in
the manner specified in sub-section (5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought
to the notice of the police:
Provided that such statement shall, as far as practicable, be recorded by a woman
Magistrate and in her absence by a male Magistrate in the presence of a woman:
Provided further that in cases relating to the offences punishable with imprisonment
for ten years or more or with imprisonment for life or with death, the Magistrate shall record
the statement of the witness brought before him by the police officer:
Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently,
mentally or physically disabled, the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or
a special educator in recording the statement:
Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently,
mentally or physically disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of
an interpreter or a special educator, shall be recorded through audio-video electronic means
preferably by mobile phone;
(b) a statement recorded under clause (a) of a person, who is temporarily or
permanently, mentally or physically disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu of
examination-in-chief, as specified in section 142 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023
such that the maker of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, without the
need for recording the same at the time of trial.
(7) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall
forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be inquired into or tried.
184. (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape or attempt to
commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with
whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a
medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner
employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and in the absence of
such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the consent of such
woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall
be sent to such registered medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of
receiving the information relating to the commission of such offence.
Medical
examination
of victim of
rape.

(2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without
delay, examine her person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following
particulars, namely:—
(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was
brought;
(ii) the age of the woman;
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for
DNA profiling;
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person
competent to give such consent on her behalf to such examination had been obtained.
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be
noted in the report.
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, within a period of seven days forward
the report to the investigating officer who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in
section 193 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that
section.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination
without the consent of the woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her
behalf.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "examination" and "registered
medical practitioner" shall have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them in
section 51.
185. (1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making an
investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes
of an investigation into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be found in
any place within the limits of the police station of which he is in charge, or to which he is
attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise obtained without undue
delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief in the case-diary
and specifying in such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made,
search, or cause search to be made, for such thing in any place within the limits of such
station.
(2) A police officer proceeding under sub-section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the
search in person:
Provided that the search conducted under this section shall be recorded through
audio-video electronic means preferably by mobile phone.
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person
competent to make the search present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his
reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him to make the search, and he shall
deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be searched,
and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; and such subordinate
officer may thereupon search for such thing in such place.
Search by
police officer.

(4) The provisions of this Sanhita as to search-warrants and the general provisions as
to searches contained in section 103 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under
this section.
(5) Copies of any record made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall forthwith,
but not later than forty-eight hours, be sent to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on
application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate.
186. (1) An officer in charge of a police station or a police officer not being below the
rank of sub-inspector making an investigation may require an officer in charge of another
police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a search to be made in any
place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, within the
limits of his own station.
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of
section 185, and shall forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the
search was made.
(3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by requiring an
officer in charge of another police station to cause a search to be made under
sub-section (1) might result in evidence of the commission of an offence being concealed or
destroyed, it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer
making any investigation under this Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any place
in the limits of another police station in accordance with the provisions of section 185, as if
such place were within the limits of his own police station.
(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall forthwith send notice
of the search to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which such
place is situate, and shall also send with such notice a copy of the list (if any) prepared
under section 103, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3) of
section 185.
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished
free of cost with a copy of any record sent to the Magistrate under sub-section (4).
187. (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears
that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by
section 58, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is
well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the
investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the
nearest Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter specified relating to the
case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may,
irrespective of whether he has or has no jurisdiction to try the case, after taking into
consideration whether such person has not been released on bail or his bail has been
cancelled, authorise, from time to time, the detention of the accused in such custody as
such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole, or in parts, at
any time during the initial forty days or sixty days out of detention period of sixty days or
ninety days, as the case may be, as provided in sub-section (3), and if he has no jurisdiction
to try the case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may
order the accused to be forwarded to a Magistrate having such jurisdiction.
(3) The Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, beyond the
period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no
Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this
sub-section for a total period exceeding—
When officer
in charge of
police station
may require
another to
issue searchwarrant.
Procedure
when
investigation
cannot be
completed in
twenty-four
hours.

(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of ten years or more;
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence,
and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the
accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every
person released on bail under this sub-section shall be deemed to be so released under the
provisions of Chapter XXXV for the purposes of that Chapter.
(4) No Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police
under this section unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and
subsequently every time till the accused remains in the custody of the police, but the
Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on production of the accused
either in person or through the audio-video electronic means.
(5) No Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the
High Court, shall authorise detention in the custody of the police.
Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that,
notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (3), the accused shall be
detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.
Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person was produced
before the Magistrate as required under sub-section (4), the production of the accused
person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising detention or by the order
certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the audio-video
electronic means, as the case may be:
Provided that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age, the detention shall be
authorised to be in the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution:
Provided further that no person shall be detained otherwise than in police station
under police custody or in prison under judicial custody or a place declared as prison by the
Central Government or the State Government.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) to sub-section (5), the
officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is
not below the rank of a sub-inspector, may, where a Magistrate is not available, transmit to
the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a Magistrate have been conferred,
a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter specified relating to the case, and shall, at the
same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and thereupon such Executive
Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the
accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in
the aggregate; and, on the expiry of the period of detention so authorised, the accused
person shall be released on bail except where an order for further detention of the accused
person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and, where an order
for such further detention is made, the period during which the accused person was detained
in custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub-section, shall
be taken into account in computing the period specified in sub-section (3):
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate shall
transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of
the entries in the diary relating to the case which was transmitted to him by the officer in
charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, as the case may
be.
(7) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police
shall record his reasons for so doing.

(8) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall
forward a copy of his order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(9) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the investigation is not
concluded within a period of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested,
the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence unless
the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special reasons and in
the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six
months is necessary.
(10) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made
under sub-section (9), the Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application made to
him or otherwise, that further investigation into the offence ought to be made, vacate the
order made under sub-section (9) and direct further investigation to be made into the
offence subject to such directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify.
188. When any subordinate police officer has made any investigation under this
Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the police
station.
189. If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of
the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to
justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in
custody, release him on his executing a bond or bail bond, as such officer may direct, to
appear, if and when so required, before a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the
offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him for trial.
190. (1) If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge
of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid,
such officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence upon a police report and to try the accused or commit him for trial,
or, if the offence is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall take security from
him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance from
day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed:
Provided that if the accused is not in custody, the police officer shall take security
from such person for his appearance before the Magistrate and the Magistrate to whom
such report is forwarded shall not refuse to accept the same on the ground that the accused
is not taken in custody.
(2) When the officer in charge of a police station forwards an accused person to a
Magistrate or takes security for his appearance before such Magistrate under this section,
he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other article which it may be necessary to
produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so many of the persons
who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case as
he may think necessary, to execute a bond to appear before the Magistrate as thereby
directed and prosecute or give evidence (as the case may be) in the matter of the charge
against the accused.
(3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court
shall be held to include any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry
or trial, provided reasonable notice of such reference is given to such complainant or
persons.
(4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to
one of the persons who executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with
his report.
Report of
investigation
by subordinate
police officer.
Release of
accused when
evidence
deficient.
Cases to be
sent to
Magistrate,
when evidence
is sufficient.

191. No complainant or witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany
a police officer, or shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required
to give any security for his appearance other than his own bond:
Provided that if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as
directed in section 190, the officer in charge of the police station may forward him in
custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody until he executes such bond, or
until the hearing of the case is completed.
192. (1) Every police officer making an investigation under this Chapter shall day by
day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the
information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place
or places visited by him, and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his
investigation.
(2) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under
section 180 shall be inserted in the case diary.
(3) The diary referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a volume and duly paginated.
(4) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial
in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such
inquiry or trial.
(5) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor
shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the Court; but,
if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his memory, or if the Court
uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of section 148
or section 164, as the case may be, of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, shall apply.
193. (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without
unnecessary delay.
(2) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be completed within two months from the
date on which the information was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station.
(3) (i) As soon as the investigation is completed, the officer in charge of the police
station shall forward, including through electronic communication to a Magistrate empowered
to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form as the State
Government may, by rules provide, stating—
(a) the names of the parties;
(b) the nature of the information;
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances
of the case;
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;
(f) whether the accused has been released on his bond or bail bond;
(g) whether the accused has been forwarded in custody under section 190;
(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
where investigation relates to an offence under sections 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70 or
section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(i) the sequence of custody in case of electronic device;
Complainant
and witnesses
not to be
required to
accompany
police officer
and not to be
subject to
restraint.
Diary of
proceedings in
investigation.
Report of
police officer
on completion
of
investigation.
32 of 2012.

(ii) the police officer shall, within a period of ninety days, inform the progress of the
investigation by any means including through electronic communication to the informant
or the victim;
(iii) the officer shall also communicate, in such manner as the State Government may,
by rules, provide, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information
relating to the commission of the offence was first given.
(4) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 177, the
report shall, in any case in which the State Government by general or special order so
directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the Magistrate,
direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation.
(5) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused
has been released on his bond or bail bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the
discharge of such bond or bail bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.
(6) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 190 applies, the police
officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report—
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes
to rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;
(b) the statements recorded under section 180 of all the persons whom the
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses.
(7) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant
to the subject matter of the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential
in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he shall indicate that part
of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the
copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.
(8) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (7), the police officer
investigating the case shall also submit such number of copies of the police report along
with other documents duly indexed to the Magistrate for supply to the accused as required
under section 230:
Provided that supply of report and other documents by electronic communication
shall be considered as duly served.
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect
of an offence after a report under sub-section (3) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and,
where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains further
evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports
regarding such evidence in the form as the State Government may, by rules, provide; and
the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (8) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such
report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (3):
Provided that further investigation during the trial may be conducted with the
permission of the Court trying the case and the same shall be completed within a period of
ninety days which may be extended with the permission of the Court.
194. (1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer
specially empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a
person has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery
or by an accident, or has died under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that
some other person has committed an offence, he shall immediately give intimation thereof
to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless otherwise
directed by any rule made by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the
District or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such
deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of the
Police to
enquire and
report on
suicide, etc.

neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of
death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be
found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument
(if any), such marks appear to have been inflicted.
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many
of them as concur therein, and shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate or the
Sub-divisional Magistrate within twenty-four hours.
(3) When—
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage
in any circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed
an offence in relation to such woman; or
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage
and any relative of the woman has made a request in this behalf; or
(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or
(v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do,
he shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward
the body, with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified
medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather
and the distance admit of its being so forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the
road as would render such examination useless.
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District
Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially
empowered in this behalf by the State Government or the District Magistrate.
195. (1) A police officer proceeding under section 194 may, by order in writing, summon
two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any other
person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so
summoned shall be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions
the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a
penalty or forfeiture:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty
years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness
shall be required to attend at any place other than the place where such person resides:
Provided further that if such person is willing to attend and answer at the police
station, such person may be permitted so to do.
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 190 applies, such
persons shall not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate's Court.
196. (1) When the case is of the nature referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of
sub-section (3) of section 194, the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold inquests shall,
and in any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 194, any Magistrate so
empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to,
the investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers
in conducting it which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence.
(2) Where,—
(a) any person dies or disappears; or
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authorised
Power to
summon
persons.
Inquiry by
Magistrate
into cause of
death.

by the Magistrate or the Court, under this Sanhita in addition to the inquiry or investigation
held by the police, an inquiry shall be held by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction
the offence has been committed.
(3) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by him in
connection therewith in any manner hereinafter specified according to the circumstances of
the case.
(4) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the
dead body of any person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of
his death, the Magistrate may cause the body to be disinterred and examined.
(5) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever
practicable, inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses are known,
and shall allow them to remain present at the inquiry.
(6) The Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate or the police officer holding an inquiry
or investigation under sub-section (2) shall, within twenty-four hours of the death of a
person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil Surgeon or
other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, unless it
is not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression "relative" means parents, children,
brothers, sisters and spouse.
CHAPTER XIV
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
197. Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a Court within whose
local jurisdiction it was committed.
198. (a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was
committed; or
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another; or
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local
areas than one; or
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas,
it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
199. When an act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done and of a
consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued.
200. When an act is an offence by reason of its relation to any other act which is also
an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were capable of committing an offence,
the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction either act was done.
201. (1) Any offence of dacoity, or of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of
dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose
local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is found.
(2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or abducted or was
conveyed or concealed or detained.
(3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court
within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is
Ordinary place
of inquiry and
trial.
Place of
inquiry or
trial.
Offence
triable where
act is done or
consequence
ensues.
Place of trial
where act is an
offence by
reason of
relation to
other offence.
Place of trial
in case of
certain
offences.

the subject of the offence was possessed by any person committing it or by any person
who received or retained such property knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen
property.
(4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed
or any part of the property which is the subject of the offence was received or retained, or
was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person.
(5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inquired
into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the
stolen property was possessed by any person who received or retained it knowing or
having reason to believe it to be stolen property.
202. (1) Any offence which includes cheating, may, if the deception is practised by
means of electronic communications or letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired
into or tried by any Court within whose local jurisdiction such electronic communications
or letters or messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and
dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person deceived or was received
by the accused person.
(2) Any offence punishable under section 82 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was
committed or the offender last resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage, or the wife
by the first marriage has taken up permanent residence after the commission of the offence.
203. When an offence is committed whilst the person by or against whom, or the
thing in respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey
or voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local
jurisdiction that person or thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage.
204. Where—
(a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged
with, and tried at one trial for, each such offence by virtue of the provisions of
section 242, section 243 or section 244; or
(b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such that they
may be charged with and tried together by virtue of the provisions of section 246,
the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent to inquire into or try any
of the offences.
205. Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of this Chapter,
the State Government may direct that any case or class of cases committed for trial in any
district may be tried in any sessions division:
Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by
the High Court or the Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this Sanhita or any
other law for the time being in force.
206. Where two or more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a
question arises as to which of them ought to inquire into or try that offence, the question
shall be decided—
(a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court;
(b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court
within the local limits of whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were
first commenced,
and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued.
Offences
committed by
means of
electronic
communications,
letters, etc.
Offence
committed on
journey or
voyage.
Place of trial
for offences
triable
together.
Power to
order cases to
be tried in
different
sessions
divisions.
High Court to
decide, in case
of doubt,
district where
inquiry or trial
shall take
place.

207. (1) When a Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe that any person
within his local jurisdiction has committed outside such jurisdiction (whether within or
outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 197 to 205 (both
inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be inquired into or tried within such
jurisdiction but is under any law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate
may inquire into the offence as if it had been committed within such local jurisdiction and
compel such person in the manner hereinbefore provided to appear before him, and send
such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, if
such offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such person is
ready and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this
section, take a bond or bail bond for his appearance before the Magistrate having such
jurisdiction.
(2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the
Magistrate acting under this section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before
whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, the case shall be reported for the
orders of the High Court.
208. When an offence is committed outside India—
(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or
(b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in
India,
he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place
within India at which he may be found or where the offence is registered in India:
Provided that notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding sections of this
Chapter, no such offence shall be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government.
209. When any offence alleged to have been committed in a territory outside India is
being inquired into or tried under the provisions of section 208, the Central Government
may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced, either in
physical form or in electronic form, before a judicial officer, in or for that territory or before
a diplomatic or consular representative of India in or for that territory shall be received as
evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might
issue a commission for taking evidence as to the matters to which such depositions or
exhibits relate.
CHAPTER XV
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS
210. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class,
and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under
sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence—
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts, including any complaint filed by a
person authorised under any special law, which constitutes such offence;
(b) upon a police report (submitted in any mode including electronic mode) of
such facts;
(c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or
upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to
take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to
inquire into or try.
Power to issue
summons or
warrant for
offence
committed
beyond local
jurisdiction.
Offence
committed
outside India.
Receipt of
evidence
relating to
offences
committed
outside India.
Cognizance of
offences by
Magistrate.

211. When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 210, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed
that he is entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the
accused or any of the accused, if there be more than one, objects to further proceedings
before the Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be transferred to such other Magistrate
as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf.
212. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence,
make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him.
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial
to such other competent Magistrate as the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, by general or
special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the inquiry or trial.
213. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for
the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court
of original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this
Sanhita.
214. An Additional Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the
division may, by general or special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may,
by special order, direct him to try.
215. (1) No Court shall take cognizance—
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 206 to 223 (both inclusive but
excluding section 209) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence; or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public
servant to whom he is administratively subordinate or of some other public servant who is
authorised by the concerned public servant so to do;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely, sections 229 to 233 (both inclusive), 236, 237,
242 to 248 (both inclusive) and 267, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court; or
(ii) of any offence described in sub-section (1) of section 336, or punishable
under sub-section (2) of section 340 or section 342 of the said Sanhita, when such
offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document produced or
given in evidence in a proceeding in any Court; or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment
of, any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii),
except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such officer of the Court as that Court
may authorise in writing in this behalf, or of some other Court to which that Court is
subordinate.
Transfer on
application of
accused.
Making over
of cases to
Magistrates.
Cognizance of
offences by
Court of
Session.
Additional
Sessions Judges
to try cases
made over to
them.
Prosecution
for contempt
of lawful
authority of
public
servants, for
offences
against public
justice and for
offences
relating to
documents
given in
evidence.

(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant or by some other public
servant who has been authorised to do so by him under clause (a) of sub-section (1), any
authority to which he is administratively subordinate or who has authorised such public
servant, may, order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to the
Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the
complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first
instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or
Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central or State Act if
declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section.
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be
subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or
sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees no appeal
ordinarily lies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction within whose
local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate:
Provided that—
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior
jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate;
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be
deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the
case or proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been
committed.
216. A witness or any other person may file a complaint in relation to an offence
under section 232 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
217. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of—
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VII or under section 196, section 299
or sub-section (1) of section 353 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence; or
(c) any such abetment, as is described in section 47 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023,
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government.
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of—
(a) any offence punishable under section 197 or sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) of section 353 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government or
of the District Magistrate.
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable
under sub-section (2) of section 61 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, other than a
criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or
the District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings:
Procedure for
witnesses in
case of
threatening,
etc.
Prosecution
for offences
against State
and for
criminal
conspiracy to
commit such
offence.

Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of
section 215 apply, no such consent shall be necessary.
(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) and the District Magistrate may, before according
sanction under sub-section (2) and the State Government or the District Magistrate may,
before giving consent under sub-section (3), order a preliminary investigation by a police
officer not being below the rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have
the powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 174.
218. (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant not
removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the
previous sanction save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of
the Union, of the Central Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of
a State, of the State Government:
Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in
clause (b) during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the
Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for the expression "State
Government" occurring therein, the expression "Central Government" were substituted:
Provided further that such Government shall take a decision within a period of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of the receipt of the request for sanction and in case
it fails to do so, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by such Government:
Provided also that no sanction shall be required in case of a public servant accused of
any offence alleged to have been committed under section 64, section 65, section 66,
section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77,
section 78, section 79, section 143, section 199 or section 200 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by
any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged
with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the expression
"Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were
substituted.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no Court shall take
cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces
charged with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting or purporting to act in
the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation issued under
clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government.
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, may determine the person by
whom, the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such
Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before
which the trial is to be held.
Prosecution of
Judges and
public
servants.
1 of 2014.

219. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under sections 81 to
84 (both inclusive) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by
some person aggrieved by the offence:
Provided that—
(a) where such person is a child, or is of unsound mind or is having intellectual
disability requiring higher support needs, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to
make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners,
ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave
of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf;
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed
Forces of the Union under conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer
as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a complaint
in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under section 82 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf
by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father's or mother's
brother or sister, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by
blood, marriage or adoption.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband of the
woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 84 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the
complaint is sought to be made on behalf of a child or of a person of unsound mind by a
person who has not been appointed or declared by a competent authority to be the guardian
of the child, or of the person of unsound mind, and the Court is satisfied that there is a
guardian so appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for
leave, cause notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), shall
be in writing, shall be signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement
to the effect that he has been informed of the allegations upon which the complaint is to be
founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall be accompanied by
a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of
making a complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband.
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the
provisions of sub-section (4), and any document purporting to be a certificate required by
that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be genuine and shall
be received in evidence.
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 64 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his
own wife, the wife being under eighteen years of age, if more than one year has elapsed from
the date of the commission of the offence.
Prosecution
for offences
against
marriage.

(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an
offence as they apply to the offence.
220. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 85 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a police report of facts which constitute such
offence or upon a complaint made by the person aggrieved by the offence or by her father,
mother, brother, sister or by her father's or mother's brother or sister or, with the leave of the
Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption.
221. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 67 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon
prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having
been filed or made by the wife against the husband.
222. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 356 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
by the offence:
Provided that where such person is a child, or is of unsound mind or is having
intellectual disability or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a
woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to
appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on
his or her behalf.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita, when any offence falling
under section 356 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed
against a person who, at the time of such commission, is the President of India, the
Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union territory or a
Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any other public servant
employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct
in the discharge of his public functions, a Court of Session may take cognizance of such
offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the
Public Prosecutor.
(3) Every complaint referred to in sub-section (2) shall set forth the facts which
constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are
reasonably sufficient to give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been
committed by him.
(4) No complaint under sub-section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except
with the previous sanction—
(a) of the State Government,—
(i) in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or
a Minister of that Government;
(ii) in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with
the affairs of the State;
(b) of the Central Government, in any other case.
(5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2)
unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged
to have been committed.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the
offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence
before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance
of the offence upon such complaint.
Prosecution of
offences under
section 85 of
Bharatiya
Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
Cognizance of
offence.
Prosecution
for
defamation.

CHAPTER XVI
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES
223. (1) A Magistrate having jurisdiction while taking cognizance of an offence on
complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and
the substance of such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the
complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate:
Provided that no cognizance of an offence shall be taken by the Magistrate without
giving the accused an opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not
examine the complainant and the witnesses—
(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duties or a Court has made the complaint; or
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate
under section 212:
Provided also that if the Magistrate makes over the case to another Magistrate under
section 212 after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need
not re-examine them.
(2) A Magistrate shall not take cognizance on a complaint against a public servant for
any offence alleged to have been committed in course of the discharge of his official
functions or duties unless—
(a) such public servant is given an opportunity to make assertions as to the
situation that led to the incident so alleged; and
(b) a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from the officer
superior to such public servant is received.
224. If the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance
of the offence, he shall,—
(a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court
with an endorsement to that effect;
(b) if the complaint is not in writing, direct the complainant to the proper Court.
225. (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is
authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 212, may,
if he thinks fit, and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area
in which he exercises his jurisdiction, postpone the issue of process against the accused,
and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police
officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not
there is sufficient ground for proceeding:
Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,—
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session; or
(b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant
and the witnesses present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 223.
(2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take
evidence of witnesses on oath:
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his
witnesses and examine them on oath.
(3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a person not being a police
officer, he shall have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Sanhita on an
officer in charge of a police station except the power to arrest without warrant.
Examination
of complainant.
Procedure by
Magistrate not
competent to
take
cognizance of
case.
Postponement
of issue of
process.

226. If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the complainant and of the
witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 225, the
Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss
the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing.
CHAPTER XVII
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES
227. (1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is
sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be—
(a) a summons-case, he shall issue summons to the accused for his
attendance; or
(b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for
causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate
or (if he has no jurisdiction himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction:
Provided that summons or warrants may also be issued through electronic means.
(2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1)
until a list of the prosecution witnesses has been filed.
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or
warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint.
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees or other fees are
payable, no process shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid
within a reasonable time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 90.
228. (1) Whenever a Magistrate issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do,
dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and permit him to appear by his
advocate.
(2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any
stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary,
enforce such attendance in the manner hereinbefore provided.
229. (1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of a petty offence, the
case may be summarily disposed of under section 283 or section 284, the Magistrate shall,
except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue
summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by an advocate before
the Magistrate on a specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without
appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post or by
messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the amount of fine specified in the
summons or if he desires to appear by an advocate and to plead guilty to the charge
through such advocate, to authorise, in writing, the advocate to plead guilty to the charge
on his behalf and to pay the fine through such advocate:
Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summons shall not exceed five
thousand rupees.
(2) For the purposes of this section, "petty offence" means any offence punishable
only with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so
punishable under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, or under any other law which provides for
convicting the accused person in his absence on a plea of guilty.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to
exercise the powers conferred by sub-section (1) in relation to any offence which is
compoundable under section 359 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months, or with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion
that, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only
would meet the ends of justice.
Dismissal of
complaint.
Issue of
process.
Magistrate
may dispense
with personal
attendance of
accused.
Special
summons in
cases of petty
offence.
59 of 1988.

230. In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the
Magistrate shall without delay, and in no case beyond fourteen days from the date of
production or appearance of the accused, furnish to the accused and the victim (if represented
by an advocate) free of cost, a copy of each of the following:—
(i) the police report;
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 173;
(iii) the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of section 180 of all persons
whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any
part in regard to which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police
officer under sub-section (7) of section 193;
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 183;
(v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate
with the police report under sub-section (6) of section 193:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is
referred to in clause (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the
request, direct that a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the
Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused:
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused and the victim (if represented by an
advocate) with a copy thereof, may furnish the copies through electronic means or direct
that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through an advocate in Court:
Provided also that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as duly
furnished.
231. Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the
Magistrate issuing process under section 227 that the offence is triable exclusively by the
Court of Session, the Magistrate shall forthwith furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy
of each of the following:—
(i) the statements recorded under section 223 or section 225, of all persons
examined by the Magistrate;
(ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 180 or
section 183;
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution
proposes to rely:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is voluminous, he
shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be
allowed to inspect it either personally or through an advocate in Court:
Provided further that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as
duly furnished.
232. When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or
is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall—
(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section 230 or section 231
the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating
to bail, remand the accused to custody until such commitment has been made;
(b) subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating to bail, remand the accused
to custody during, and until the conclusion of, the trial;
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if
any, which are to be produced in evidence;
Supply to
accused of
copy of police
report and
other
documents.
Supply of
copies of
statements
and documents
to accused in
other cases
triable by
Court of
Session.
Commitment
of case to Court
of Session when
offence is
triable
exclusively by
it.

(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court of
Session:
Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed within a period
of ninety days from the date of taking cognizance, and such period may be extended by the
Magistrate for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days for the reasons to be
recorded in writing:
Provided further that any application filed before the Magistrate by the accused or
the victim or any person authorised by such person in a case triable by Court of Session,
shall be forwarded to the Court of Session with the committal of the case.
233. (1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter
referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the Magistrate, during the course of
the inquiry or trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation
to the offence which is the subject-matter of the inquiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate
shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry or trial and call for a report on the matter from the
police officer conducting the investigation.
(2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under section 193 and on
such report cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who
is an accused in the complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the
complaint case and the case arising out of the police report as if both the cases were
instituted on a police report.
(3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the
Magistrate does not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed
with the inquiry or trial, which was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of this
Sanhita.
CHAPTER XVIII
THE CHARGE
A.—Form of charges
234. (1) Every charge under this Sanhita shall state the offence with which the accused
is charged.
(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be
described in the charge by that name only.
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of
the definition of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with
which he is charged.
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been
committed shall be mentioned in the charge.
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal
condition required by law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular
case.
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court.
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by
reason of such previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different
kind, for a subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the
purpose of affecting the punishment which the Court may think fit, to award for the
subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous conviction shall be stated in
the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time before
sentence is passed.
Illustrations.
(a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell
within the definition of murder given in sections 100 and 101 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Procedure to
be followed
when there is
a complaint
case and
police
investigation
in respect of
same offence.
Contents of
charge.

Sanhita, 2023; that it did not fall within any of the general exceptions of the said Sanhita;
and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 101 thereof, or that, if it did
fall within Exception 1, one or other of the three provisos to that exception applied to it.
(b) A is charged under sub-section (2) of section 118 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, with voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B by means of an instrument for
shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by
sub-section (2) of section 122 of the said Sanhita, and that the general exceptions did not
apply to it.
(c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, or criminal intimidation, or using
a false property-mark. The charge may state that A committed murder, or
cheating, or theft, or extortion, or criminal intimidation, or that he used a false propertymark, without reference to the definitions, of those crimes contained in the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance
be referred to in the charge.
(d) A is charged under section 219 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with
intentionally obstructing a sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a
public servant. The charge should be in those words.
235. (1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of the
alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of
which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the
matter with which he is charged.
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest
misappropriation of money or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the
gross sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property in respect of which the
offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates between which the offence is
alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the
charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of
section 242:
Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not
exceed one year.
236. When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in
sections 234 and 235 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he
is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the alleged
offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge
need not set out the manner in which the theft was effected.
(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the
manner in which A cheated B.
(c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place. The charge must
set out that portion of the evidence given by A which is alleged to be false.
(d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public
functions at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which
A obstructed B in the discharge of his functions.
(e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not
state the manner in which A murdered B.
(f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent to save B from
punishment. The charge must set out the disobedience charged and the law infringed.
237. In every charge words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have
been used in the sense attached to them respectively by the law under which such offence
is punishable.
Particulars as
to time, place
and person.
When manner
of committing
offence must
be stated.
Words in charge
taken in sense of
law under which
offence is
punishable.

238. No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in the
charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any
stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission,
and it has occasioned a failure of justice.
Illustrations.
(a) A is charged under section 180 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with "having
been in possession of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed
thereof that such coin was counterfeit," the word "fraudulently" being omitted in the charge.
Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the error shall not be regarded
as material.
(b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out
in the charge or is set out incorrectly. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own
account of the transaction. The Court may infer from this that the omission to set out the
manner of the cheating is not material.
(c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out
in the charge. There were many transactions between A and B, and A had no means of
knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no defence. The Court may infer
from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating was, in the case, a
material error.
(d) A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 2023. In fact, the
murdered person's name was Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was
the 20th January, 2023. A was never charged with any murder but one, and had heard the
inquiry before the Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The
Court may infer from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was
immaterial.
(e) A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 2023, and
Khoda Baksh (who tried to arrest him for that murder) on the 21st January, 2023. When
charged for the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of Khoda Baksh. The
witnesses present in his defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court
may infer from this that A was misled, and that the error was material.
239. (1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before judgment is
pronounced.
(2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused.
(3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with
the trial is not likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or
the prosecutor in the conduct of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after such
alteration or addition has been made, proceed with the trial as if the altered or added charge
had been the original charge.
(4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is
likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid,
the Court may either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary.
(5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of
which previous sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such
sanction is obtained, unless sanction has been already obtained for a prosecution on the
same facts as those on which the altered or added charge is founded.
240. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the commencement
of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed—
(a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or
addition, any witness who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may
be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for the purpose of vexation or delay or
for defeating the ends of justice;
Effect of
errors.
Court may
alter charge.
Recall of
witnesses
when charge
altered.

(b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material.
B.—Joinder of charges
241. (1) For every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a
separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately:
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and
the Magistrate is of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the
Magistrate may try together all or any number of the charges framed against such person.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of
sections 242, 243, 244 and 246.
Illustration.
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another
occasion. A must be separately charged and separately tried for the theft and causing
grievous hurt.
242. (1) When a person is accused of more offences than one of the same kind
committed within the space of twelve months from the first to the last of such offences,
whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial
for, any number of them not exceeding five.
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of
punishment under the same section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any special
or local law:
Provided that for the purposes of this section, an offence punishable under
sub-section (2) of section 303 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be
an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable under section 305 of the said Sanhita,
and that an offence punishable under any section of the said Sanhita, or of any special or
local law, shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit such
offence, when such an attempt is an offence.
243. (1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form the same transaction,
more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, and
tried at one trial for, every such offence.
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or
dishonest misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 235 or in
sub-section (1) of section 242, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or
concealing the commission of that offence or those offences, one or more offences of
falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such
offence.
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions
of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person
accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
constitute an offence, constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of
them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts
when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, of such acts.
(5)
Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 9 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Illustrations to sub-section (1)
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to
C, a constable in whose custody B was. A may be charged with, and convicted of, offences
under sub-section (2) of section 121 and section 263 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(b) A commits house-breaking by day with intent to commit rape, and commits, in the
house so entered, rape with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of,
offences under section 64 and sub-section (3) of section 331 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
Separate
charges for
distinct
offences.
Offences of
same kind
within year
may be
charged
together.
Trial for more
than one
offence.

(c) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending
to use them for the purpose of committing several forgeries punishable under section 337 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, the
possession of each seal under sub-section (2) of section 341 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(d) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him,
knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses
B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such
charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences under
section 248 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(e) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an
offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives
false evidence against B, intending thereby to cause B to be convicted of a capital offence.
A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 230 and 248
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(f) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting, grievous hurt and assaulting a
public servant endeavouring in the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A
may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sub-section (2) of
section 117, sub-section (2) of section 191 and section 195 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
(g) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to
cause alarm to them. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three
offences under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
The separate charges referred to in illustrations (a) to (g), respectively, may be tried
at the same time.
Illustrations to sub-section (3)
(h) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with, and convicted
of, offences under sub-section (2) of section 115 and section 131 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
(i) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen
property, for the purpose of concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each
other to conceal the sacks at the bottom of a grain-pit. A and B may be separately charged
with, and convicted of, offences under sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 317 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(j) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause its death.
The child dies in consequence of such exposure. A may be separately charged with, and
convicted of, offences under sections 93 and 105 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(k) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B,
a public servant, of an offence under section 201 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A
may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under section 233 and
sub-section (2) of section 340 (read with section 337) of that Sanhita.
Illustration to sub-section (4)
(l) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be
separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sub-section (2) of section 115
and sub-sections (2) and (4) of section 309 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
244. (1) If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of
several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be charged
with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be
tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed someone of the
said offences.
Where it is
doubtful what
offence has
been
committed.

(2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in
evidence that he committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under
the provisions of sub-section (1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to
have committed, although he was not charged with it.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or
criminal breach of trust or cheating. He may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property,
criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having committed theft, or
receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.
(b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed
the offence of criminal breach of trust, or that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted
of criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be), though he was
not charged with such offence.
(c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the
Sessions Court A states on oath that B never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and
convicted of intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved which of
these contradictory statements was false.
245. (1) When a person is charged with an offence consisting of several particulars,
a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete minor offence, and such
combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be convicted of
the minor offence, though he was not charged with it.
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it
to a minor offence, he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged
with it.
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to
commit such offence although the attempt is not separately charged.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor
offence where the conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that
minor offence have not been satisfied.
Illustrations.
(a) A is charged, under sub-section (3) of section 316 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, with criminal breach of trust in respect of property entrusted to him as a
carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal breach of trust under sub-section (2) of
section 316 of that Sanhita in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him
as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust under the said sub-section (2)
of section 316.
(b) A is charged, under sub-section (2) of section 117 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, with causing grievous hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and sudden
provocation. He may be convicted under sub-section (2) of section 122 of that Sanhita.
246. The following persons may be charged and tried together, namely:—
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same
transaction;
(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or
attempt to commit, such offence;
(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind, within the
meaning of section 242 committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months;
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same
transaction;
(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extortion, cheating, or
criminal misappropriation, and persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting
in the disposal or concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have
When offence
proved
included in
offence
charged.
What persons
may be
charged
jointly.

been transferred by any such offence committed by the first-named persons, or of
abetment of or attempting to commit any such last-named offence;
(f) persons accused of offences under sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 317 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or either of those sections in respect of stolen
property the possession of which has been transferred by one offence;
(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter X of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence
under the said Chapter relating to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to
commit any such offence; and the provisions contained in the former part of this
Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges:
Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and
such persons do not fall within any of the categories specified in this section, the Magistrate
or Court of Session may, if such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and if he or
it is satisfied that such persons would not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is expedient
so to do, try all such persons together.
247. When a charge containing more heads than one is framed against the same
person, and when a conviction has been had on one or more of them, the complainant, or
the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent of the Court, withdraw the
remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the inquiry into, or trial
of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such
charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject
to the order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or
trial of, the charge or charges so withdrawn.
CHAPTER XIX
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION
248. In every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be conducted by a
Public Prosecutor.
249. When the accused appears or is brought before the Court, in pursuance of a
commitment of the case under section 232, or under any other law for the time being in force,
the prosecutor shall open his case by describing the charge brought against the accused
and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused.
250. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of
sixty days from the date of commitment of the case under section 232.
(2) If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted
therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this
behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing.
251. (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion
that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which—
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge
against the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and direct
the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the Judicial Magistrate
of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate shall
try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases instituted
on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against
the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge.
Withdrawal of
remaining
charges on
conviction on
one of several
charges.
Trial to be
conducted by
Public
Prosecutor.
Opening case
for
prosecution.
Discharge.
Framing of
charge.

(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the
charge shall be read and explained to the accused present either physically or through
audio-video electronic means and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of
the offence charged or claims to be tried.
252. If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his
discretion, convict him thereon.
253. If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not
convicted under section 252, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and
may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance
of any witness or the production of any document or other thing.
254. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence as may
be produced in support of the prosecution:
Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may be recorded by
audio-video electronic means.
(2) The deposition of evidence of any public servant may be taken through
audio-video electronic means.
(3) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any witness to
be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness
for further cross-examination.
255. If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and
hearing the prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no
evidence that the accused committed the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal.
256. (1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 255, he shall be called
upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.
(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record.
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance
of any witness or the production of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such
process unless he considers, for reasons to be recorded, that such application should be
refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating
the ends of justice.
257. When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the
prosecutor shall sum up his case and the accused or his advocate shall be entitled to reply:
Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his advocate, the
prosecution may, with the permission of the Judge, make his submissions with regard to
such point of law.
258. (1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall give a
judgment in the case, as soon as possible, within a period of thirty days from the date of
completion of arguments, which may be extended to a period of forty-five days for reasons
to be recorded in writing.
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance
with the provisions of section 401, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then
pass sentence on him according to law.
259. In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of
sub-section (7) of section 234, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously
convicted as alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused
under section 252 or section 258, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction,
and shall record a finding thereon:
Conviction on
plea of guilty.
Date for
prosecution
evidence.
Evidence for
prosecution.
Acquittal.
Entering upon
defence.
Arguments.
Judgment of
acquittal or
conviction.
Previous
conviction.

Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be
asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution
or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under
section 252 or section 258.
260. (1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2) of
section 222 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases
instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate:
Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed
shall, unless the Court of Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined
as a witness for the prosecution.
(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera if either party thereto so
desires or if the Court thinks fit so to do.
(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and
is of opinion that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or
any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or acquittal, direct the person against whom
the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, theVice-President
or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he
should not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when
there are more than one.
(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person
so directed, and if it is satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation,
it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such amount not
exceeding five thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such person to the accused
or to each or any of them.
(5) Compensation awarded under sub-section (4) shall be recovered as if it were a fine
imposed by a Magistrate.
(6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub-section (4)
shall, by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of
the complaint made under this section:
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken
into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating
to the same matter.
(7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4) to pay compensation
may appeal from the order, in so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High
Court.
(8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the
compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the
appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided.
CHAPTER XX
TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES
A.—Cases instituted on a police report
261. When, in any warrant-case instituted on a police report, the accused appears or
is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy
himself that he has complied with the provisions of section 230.
262. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of sixty
days from the date of supply of copies of documents under section 230.
(2) If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with it under
section 193 and making such examination, if any, of the accused, either physically or through
audio-video electronic means, as the Magistrate thinks necessary and after giving the
prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the
charge against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record
his reasons for so doing.
Compliance
with section
230.
When accused
shall be
discharged.
Procedure in
cases instituted
under
sub-section (2)
of section 222.

263. (1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate
is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence
triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his
opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the
accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge.
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked
whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried.
264. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, in his
discretion, convict him thereon.
265. (1) If the accused refuses to plead or does not plead, or claims to be tried or the
Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 264, the Magistrate shall fix a date
for the examination of witnesses:
Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statement of
witnesses recorded during investigation by the police.
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to
any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
(3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may
be produced in support of the prosecution:
Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of any witness to be
deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for
further cross-examination:
Provided further that the examination of a witness under this sub-section may be
done by audio-video electronic means at the designated place to be notified by the State
Government.
266. (1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce
his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it
with the record.
(2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence, applies to the Magistrate to
issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination
or cross-examination, or the production of any document or other thing, the Magistrate
shall issue such process unless he considers that such application should be refused on
the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of
justice and such ground shall be recorded by him in writing:
Provided that when the accused has cross-examined or had the opportunity of
cross-examining any witness before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness
shall not be compelled under this section, unless the Magistrate is satisfied that it is
necessary for the ends of justice:
Provided further that the examination of a witness under this sub-section may be
done by audio-video electronic means at the designated place to be notified by the State
Government.
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under
sub-section (2), require that the reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending
for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court.
B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report
267. (1) When, in any warrant-case instituted otherwise than on a police report, the
accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the
prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution.
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to
any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
Framing of
charge.
Conviction on
plea of guilty.
Evidence for
prosecution.
Evidence for
defence.
Evidence for
prosecution.

268. (1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 267, the Magistrate
considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out
which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging
the accused at any previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such
Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless.
269. (1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any previous stage of the case,
the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try
and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a
charge against the accused.
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked
whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make.
(3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea, and may, in his
discretion, convict him thereon.
(4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the
accused is not convicted under sub-section (3), he shall be required to state, at the
commencement of the next hearing of the case, or, if the Magistrate for reasons to be
recorded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross-examine any, and, if
so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken.
(5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after
cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged.
(6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken,
and after cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall also be discharged.
(7) Where, despite giving opportunity to the prosecution and after taking all reasonable
measures under this Sanhita, if the attendance of the prosecution witnesses under
sub-sections (5) and (6) cannot be secured for cross-examination, it shall be deemed that
such witness has not been examined for not being available, and the Magistrate may close
the prosecution evidence for reasons to be recorded in writing and proceed with the case
on the basis of the materials on record.
270. The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce
his evidence; and the provisions of section 266 shall apply to the case.
C.—Conclusion of trial
271. (1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the
Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.
(2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty,
but does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 364 or section 401, he
shall, after hearing the accused on the question of sentence, pass sentence upon him
according to law.
(3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the
provisions of sub-section (7) of section 234 and the accused does not admit that he has
been previously convicted as alleged in the charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted
the said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall
record a finding thereon:
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the
accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the
prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been
convicted under sub-section (2).
When accused
shall be
discharged.
Procedure
where accused
is not
discharged.
Evidence for
defence.
Acquittal or
conviction.

272. When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day
fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully
compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may after giving thirty days'
time to the complainant to be present, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything
hereinbefore contained, at any time before the charge has been framed, discharge the
accused.
273. (1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint or upon information given to a
police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused before a Magistrate
of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard
discharges or acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable
ground for making the accusation against them or any of them, the Magistrate may, by his
order of discharge or acquittal, if the person upon whose complaint or information the
accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should not
pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more
than one; or, if such person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear
and show cause as aforesaid.
(2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or
informant may show, and if he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground for making
the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such
amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may determine,
be paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any of them.
(3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under
sub-section (2), further order that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such
compensation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days.
(4) When any person is imprisoned under sub-section (3), the provisions of
sub-section (6) of section 8 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall, so far as may be,
apply.
(5) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under this section shall,
by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the
complaint made or information given by him:
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken
into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating
to the same matter.
(6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub-section (2) by a
Magistrate of the second class to pay compensation exceeding two thousand rupees, may
appeal from the order, as if such complainant or informant had been convicted on a trial held
by such Magistrate.
(7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a
case which is subject to appeal under sub-section (6), the compensation shall not be paid to
him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal
is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where such order is made in a case
which is not so subject to appeal the compensation shall not be paid before the expiration
of one month from the date of the order.
(8) The provisions of this section apply to summons-cases as well as to
warrant-cases.
CHAPTER XXI
TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES
274. When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought before the
Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and
he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be
necessary to frame a formal charge:
Absence of
complainant.
Compensation
for accusation
without
reasonable
cause.
Substance of
accusation to
be stated.

Provided that if the Magistrate considers the accusation as groundless, he shall, after
recording reasons in writing, release the accused and such release shall have the effect of
discharge.
275. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as
possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.
276. (1) Where a summons has been issued under section 229 and the accused
desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, he shall
transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the
amount of fine specified in the summons.
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused in his absence, on his
plea of guilty and sentence him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount
transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards that fine, or where an advocate
authorised by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the Magistrate
shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the advocate and may, in his
discretion, convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.
277. (1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 275 or
section 276, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence
as may be produced in support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all
such evidence as he produces in his defence.
(2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the
accused, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document
or other thing.
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on such application, require
that the reasonable expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the
trial be deposited in Court.
278. (1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 277 and
such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the
accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.
(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 364 or section 401, he shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him
according to law.
(3) A Magistrate may, under section 275 or section 278, convict the accused of any
offence triable under this Chapter, which from the facts admitted or proved he appears to
have committed, whatever may be the nature of the complaint or summons, if the Magistrate
is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby.
279. (1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on the day appointed for
the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be
adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, after giving thirty days'
time to the complainant to be present, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained,
acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the
case to some other day:
Provided that where the complainant is represented by an advocate or by the officer
conducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal
attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may, dispense with his
attendance and proceed with the case.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases
where the non-appearance of the complainant is due to his death.
280. If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under this
Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to
withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against
all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon
acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.
Conviction on
plea of guilty.
Conviction on
plea of guilty
in absence of
accused in
petty cases.
Procedure
when not
convicted.
Acquittal or
conviction.
Non-appearance
or death of
complainant.
Withdrawal of
complaint.

281. In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of
the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other
Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any
stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made
after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of
acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the effect
of discharge.
282. When in the course of the trial of a summons-case relating to an offence punishable
with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to the Magistrate that in the
interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the trial
of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided
by this Sanhita for the trial of warrant-cases and may recall any witness who may have been
examined.
CHAPTER XXII
SUMMARY TRIALS
283. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita—
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(b) Magistrate of the first class,
shall try in a summary way all or any of the following offences:—
(i) theft, under sub-section (2) of section 303, section 305 or section 306 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the value of the property stolen does not exceed
twenty thousand rupees;
(ii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under sub-section (2) of section 317
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of the property does not
exceed twenty thousand rupees;
(iii) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property under
sub-section (5) of section 317 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value
of such property does not exceed twenty thousand rupees;
(iv) offences under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 331 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(v) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 352, and
criminal intimidation, under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 351 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(vi) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
(vii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is
an offence;
(viii) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint may be
made under section 20 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871.
(2) The Magistrate may, after giving the accused a reasonable opportunity of being
heard, for reasons to be recorded in writing, try in a summary way all or any of the offences
not punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding
three years:
Provided that no appeal shall lie against the decision of a Magistrate to try a case in
a summary way under this sub-section.
(3) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature
of the case is such that it is undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any
witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the manner
provided by this Sanhita.
Power to stop
proceedings in
certain cases.
Power of
Court to
convert
summonscases into
warrant-cases.
Power to try
summarily.
1 of 1871.

284. The High Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the powers of a
Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is punishable
only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine,
and any abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence.
285. (1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Sanhita for the trial
of summons-case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned.
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in
the case of any conviction under this Chapter.
286. In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the
State Government may direct, the following particulars, namely:—
(a) the serial number of the case;
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;
(c) the date of the report or complaint;
(d) the name of the complainant (if any);
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused;
(f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases
coming under clause (i), clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 283, the
value of the property in respect of which the offence has been committed;
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);
(h) the finding;
(i) the sentence or other final order;
(j) the date on which proceedings terminated.
287. In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty, the
Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief
statement of the reasons for the finding.
288. (1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the language of the Court.
(2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily
to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this
behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the record or judgment so prepared shall be
signed by such Magistrate.
CHAPTER XXIII
PLEA BARGAINING
289. (1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom—
(a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police station
under section 193 alleging therein that an offence appears to have been committed by
him other than an offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for
life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provided under the
law for the time being in force; or
(b) a Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an
offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment
for a term exceeding seven years, has been provided under the law for the time being
in force, and after examining complainant and witnesses under section 223, issued the
process under section 227,
Summary trial
by Magistrate
of second
class.
Procedure for
summary
trials.
Record in
summary
trials.
Judgment in
cases tried
summarily.
Language of
record and
judgment.
Application of
Chapter.

but does not apply where such offence affects the socio-economic condition of the country
or has been committed against a woman, or a child.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, by notification,
determine the offences under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offences
affecting the socio-economic condition of the country.
290. (1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea bargaining
within a period of thirty days from the date of framing of charge in the Court in which such
offence is pending for trial.
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall contain a brief description of the case
relating to which the application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and
shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by the accused stating therein that he has
voluntarily preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment provided
under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously
been convicted by a Court in which he had been charged with the same offence.
(3) After receiving the application under sub-section (1), the Court shall issue notice
to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and to the accused to appear on the
date fixed for the case.
(4) When the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and the accused
appear on the date fixed under sub-section (3), the Court shall examine the accused
in camera, where the other party in the case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the
accused has filed the application voluntarily and where—
(a) the Court is satisfied that the application has been filed by the accused
voluntarily, it shall provide time, not exceeding sixty days, to the Public Prosecutor or
the complainant of the case and the accused to work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case which may include giving to the victim by the accused the
compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for
further hearing of the case;
(b) the Court finds that the application has been filed involuntarily by the
accused or he has previously been convicted by a Court in a case in which he had
been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in accordance with the
provisions of this Sanhita from the stage such application has been filed under
sub-section (1).
291. In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition under clause (a) of
sub-section (4) of section 290, the Court shall follow the following procedure, namely:—
(a) in a case instituted on a police report, the Court shall issue notice to the
Public Prosecutor, the police officer who has investigated the case, the accused and
the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition
of the case:
Provided that throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition
of the case, it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is
completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:
Provided further that the accused, if he so desires, may participate in such
meeting with his advocate, if any, engaged in the case;
(b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue
notice to the accused and the victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out
a satisfactory disposition of the case:
Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such
process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is completed
voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:
Application
for plea
bargaining.
Guidelines for
mutually
satisfactory
disposition.

Provided further that if the victim of the case or the accused so desires, he may
participate in such meeting with his advocate engaged in the case.
292. Where in a meeting under section 291, a satisfactory disposition of the case has
been worked out, the Court shall prepare a report of such disposition which shall be signed
by the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons who participated in the meeting
and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such observation
and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita from the stage the
application under sub-section (1) of section 290 has been filed in such case.
293. Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under
section 292, the Court shall dispose of the case in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the Court shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the
disposition under section 292 and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment,
releasing of the accused on probation of good conduct or after admonition under
section 401 or for dealing with the accused under the provisions of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law for the time being in force and follow the procedure
specified in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused;
(b) after hearing the parties under clause (a), if the Court is of the view that
section 401 or the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law
for the time being in force are attracted in the case of the accused, it may release the
accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law;
(c) after hearing the parties under clause (b), if the Court finds that minimum
punishment has been provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused,
it may sentence the accused to half of such minimum punishment, and where the
accused is a first-time offender and has not been convicted of any offence in the past,
it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of such minimum punishment;
(d) in case after hearing the parties under clause (b), the Court finds that the
offence committed by the accused is not covered under clause (b) or clause (c), then,
it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of the punishment provided or extendable
for such offence and where the accused is a first-time offender and has not been
convicted of any offence in the past, it may sentence the accused to one-sixth of the
punishment provided or extendable, for such offence.
294. The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 293 in the open Court and
the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court.
295. The judgment delivered by the Court under this section shall be final and no
appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226
and 227 of the Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment.
296. A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating
to the disposal of a case in such Court under this Sanhita.
297. The provisions of section 468 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention
undergone by the accused against the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter,
in the same manner as they apply in respect of the imprisonment under other provisions of
this Sanhita.
298. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other provisions of this Sanhita and nothing in
such other provisions shall be construed to constrain the meaning of any provision of this
Chapter.
Report of
mutually
satisfactory
disposition to
be submitted
before Court.
Disposal of
case.
Judgment of
Court.
Finality of
judgment.
Power of
Court in plea
bargaining.
Period of
detention
undergone by
accused to be
set off against
sentence of
imprisonment.
Savings.
20 of 1958.
20 of 1958.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "Public Prosecutor"
has the meaning assigned to it under clause (v) of section 2 and includes an Assistant
Public Prosecutor appointed under section 19.
299. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under
section 290 shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter.
300. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as defined in section 2
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
CHAPTER XXIV
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS
301. In this Chapter,—
(a) "detained" includes detained under any law providing for preventive
detention;
(b) "prison" includes,—
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general
or special order, to be a subsidiary jail;
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or other institution of a like nature.
302. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or proceeding under this Sanhita,
it appears to a Criminal Court,—
(a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the
Court for answering to a charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings
against him; or
(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a
witness,
the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce such
person before the Court answering to the charge or for the purpose of such proceeding or
for giving evidence.
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate of the second class,
it shall not be forwarded to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is
countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, to whom such Magistrate is subordinate.
(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section (2) shall be
accompanied by a statement of the facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the
order necessary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom it is submitted may, after
considering such statement, decline to countersign the order.
303. (1) The State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, at
any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or special
order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in
which he or they may be confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains
in force, no order made under section 302, whether before or after the order of the State
Government or the Central Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class
of persons.
(2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State Government or the Central
Government in the cases instituted by its central agency, as the case may be, shall have
regard to the following matters, namely:—
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or
class of persons has been ordered to be confined or detained in prison;
Statements of
accused not to
be used.
Nonapplication of
Chapter.
Definitions.
Power to
require
attendance of
prisoners.
Power of State
Government
or Central
Government
to exclude
certain
persons from
operation of
section 302.
2 of 2016.

(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of
persons is allowed to be removed from the prison;
(c) the public interest, generally.
304. Where the person in respect of whom an order is made under section 302—
(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be removed from the prison; or
(b) is under committal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a
preliminary investigation; or
(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time
required for complying with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which
he is confined or detained; or
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government or the Central
Government under section 303 applies,
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shall
send to the Court a statement of reasons for so abstaining:
Provided that where the attendance of such person is required for giving evidence at
a place not more than twenty-five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge
of the prison shall not so abstain for the reason mentioned in clause (b).
305. Subject to the provisions of section 304, the officer in charge of the prison shall,
upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 302 and duly countersigned,
where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person named in the order to be
taken to the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time
mentioned in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until
he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison in
which he was confined or detained.
306. The provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to the power of the
Court to issue, under section 319, a commission for the examination, as a witness, of any
person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXV shall
apply in relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they
apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.
CHAPTER XXV
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence
307. The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Sanhita,
the language of each Court within the State other than the High Court.
308. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the
trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal
attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his advocate including through
audio-video electronic means at the designated place to be notified by the State Government:
Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is
alleged to have been subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, the
Court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such woman is not confronted by the
accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of the accused.
Explanation.—In this section, "accused" includes a person in relation to whom any
proceeding under Chapter IX has been commenced under this Sanhita.
309. (1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all inquiries under sections 164
to 167 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 491 otherwise than in the course
of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a
memorandum of the substance of the evidence in the language of the Court:
Officer in
charge of
prison to
abstain from
carrying out
order in
certain
contingencies.
Prisoner to be
brought to
Court in
custody.
Power to issue
commission
for
examination
of witness in
prison.
Language of
Courts.
Evidence to be
taken in
presence of
accused.
Record in
summonscases and
inquiries.

Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall,
after recording the reason of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or
from his dictation in open Court.
(2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the
record.
310. (1) In all warrant-cases tried before a Magistrate, the evidence of each witness
shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the Magistrate himself
or by his dictation in open Court or, where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other
incapacity, under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed
by him in this behalf:
Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may also be recorded by
audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the
offence.
(2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a
certificate that the evidence could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to
in sub-section (1).
(3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative; but the
Magistrate may, in his discretion take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such
evidence in the form of question and answer.
(4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part
of the record.
311. (1) In all trials before a Court of Session, the evidence of each witness shall, as
his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or
by his dictation in open Court, or under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of
the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the
presiding Judge may, in his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of
such evidence in the form of question and answer.
(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form
part of the record.
312. In every case where evidence is taken down under section 310 or section 311,—
(a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of the Court, it shall be taken
down in that language;
(b) if he gives evidence in any other language, it may, if practicable, be taken
down in that language, and if it is not practicable to do so, a true translation of the
evidence in the language of the Court shall be prepared as the examination of the
witness proceeds, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of
the record;
(c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the
language of the Court, a true translation thereof in the language of the Court shall be
prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and
shall form part of the record:
Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a
translation thereof in the language of the Court is not required by any of the parties,
the Court may dispense with such translation.
313. (1) As the evidence of each witness taken under section 310 or section 311 is
completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in attendance, or of
his advocate, if he appears by an advocate, and shall, if necessary, be corrected.
Record in
warrant-cases.
Record in trial
before Court
of Session.
Language of
record of
evidence.
Procedure in
regard to such
evidence when
completed.

(2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the evidence when the same is
read over to him, the Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence,
make a memorandum thereon of the objection made to it by the witness and shall add such
remarks as he thinks necessary.
(3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has
been given and the witness does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted
to him in the language in which it was given, or in a language which he understands.
314. (1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language not understood by the accused,
and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to him in open Court in a
language understood by him.
(2) If he appears by an advocate and the evidence is given in a language other than
the language of the Court, and not understood by the advocate, it shall be interpreted to
such advocate in that language.
(3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion
of the Court to interpret as much thereof as appears necessary.
315. When a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the evidence of a witness,
he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of
such witness whilst under examination.
316. (1) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate, or by a Court of
Session, the whole of such examination, including every question put to him and every
answer given by him, shall be recorded in full by the presiding Judge or Magistrate himself
or where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction
and superintendence by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
(2) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in which the accused is examined
or, if that is not practicable, in the language of the Court.
(3) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the
language in which it is written, shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands,
and he shall be at liberty to explain or add to his answers.
(4) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding
Judge, who shall certify under his own hand that the examination was taken in his presence
and hearing and that the record contains a full and true account of the statement made by
the accused:
Provided that where the accused is in custody and is examined through electronic
communication, his signature shall be taken within seventy-two hours of such examination.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused
person in the course of a summary trial.
317. When the services of an interpreter are required by any Criminal Court for the
interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true interpretation
of such evidence or statement.
318. Every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the evidence
of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming
before it, and such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such
rule.
B.—Commissions for the examination of witnesses
319. (1) Whenever, in the course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
Sanhita, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that the examination of a witness is necessary
for the ends of justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without
an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case,
Interpretation
of evidence to
accused or his
advocate.
Remarks
respecting
demeanour of
witness.
Record of
examination
of accused.
Interpreter to
be bound to
interpret
truthfully.
Record in
High Court.
When
attendance of
witness may be
dispensed with
and commission
issued.

would be unreasonable, the Court or Magistrate may dispense with such attendance and
may issue a commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter:
Provided that where the examination of the President or the Vice-President of India or
the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary
for the ends of justice, a commission shall be issued for the examination of such a witness.
(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for the examination of a witness for the
prosecution, direct that such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the expenses
of the accused, including the advocate's fees, be paid by the prosecution.
320. (1) If the witness is within the territories to which this Sanhita extends, the
commission shall be directed to the Chief Judicial Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction
the witness is to be found.
(2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area to which this Sanhita does not
extend, the commission shall be directed to such Court or officer as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
(3) If the witness is in a country or place outside India and arrangements have been
made by the Central Government with the Government of such country or place for taking
the evidence of witnesses in relation to criminal matters, the commission shall be issued in
such form, directed to such Court or officer, and sent to such authority for transmission as
the Central Government may, by notification, prescribe in this behalf.
321. Upon receipt of the commission, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or such Magistrate
as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the
place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, and may
for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials of warrant-cases under this Sanhita.
322. (1) The parties to any proceeding under this Sanhita in which a commission is
issued may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the Court or Magistrate
directing the commission may think relevant to the issue, and it shall be lawful for the
Magistrate, Court or officer to whom the commission, is directed, or to whom the duty of
executing it is delegated, to examine the witness upon such interrogatories.
(2) Any such party may appear before such Magistrate, Court or Officer by an advocate,
or if not in custody, in person, and may examine, cross-examine and re-examine the said
witness.
323. (1) After any commission issued under section 319 has been duly executed, it
shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the
Court or Magistrate issuing the commission; and the commission, the return thereto and
the deposition shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection of the parties, and may,
subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either party, and shall form
part of the record.
(2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies the conditions specified by section 27 of
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, may also be received in evidence at any subsequent
stage of the case before another Court.
324. In every case in which a commission is issued under section 319, the inquiry, trial
or other proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the
execution and return of the commission.
325. (1) The provisions of section 321 and so much of section 322 and section 323 as
relate to the execution of a commission and its return shall apply in respect of commissions
issued by any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates hereinafter mentioned as they apply to
commissions issued under section 319.
Commission
to whom to be
issued.
Execution of
commissions.
Parties may
examine
witnesses.
Return of
commission.
Adjournment
of proceeding.
Execution of
foreign
commissions.

(2) The Courts, Judges and Magistrates referred to in sub-section (1) are—
(a) any such Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction within an area in
India to which this Sanhita does not extend, as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf;
(b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in any such country
or place outside India, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf, and having authority, under the law in force in that country or place, to issue
commissions for the examination of witnesses in relation to criminal matters.
326. (1) The deposition of a civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and attested
by a Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or taken on commission under this Chapter,
may be given in evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita,
although the deponent is not called as a witness.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or
the accused, summon and examine any such deponent as to the subject-matter of his
deposition.
327. (1) Any document purporting to be a report of identification under the hand of
an Executive Magistrate in respect of a person or property may be used as evidence in any
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, although such Magistrate is not called
as a witness:
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to
which the provisions of section 19, section 26, section 27, section 158 or section 160 of the
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, apply, such statement shall not be used under this
sub-section except in accordance with the provisions of those sections.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or of
the accused, summon and examine such Magistrate as to the subject-matter of the said
report.
328. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a gazetted officer
of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press (including the
officer of the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) or of any Forensic Department or Division
of Forensic Science Laboratory or any Government Examiner of Questioned Documents or
any State Examiner of Questioned Documents as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for
examination and report in the course of any proceeding under this Sanhita, may be used as
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, although such officer
is not called as a witness.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such officer as to the
subject-matter of his report:
Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to produce any records on which
the report is based.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya
Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, no such officer shall, except with the permission of the General
Manager or any officer in charge of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any
Security Printing Press or of any Forensic Department or any officer in charge of the Forensic
Science Laboratory or of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation
or of the State Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation be permitted—
(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished official records on
which the report is based; or
Deposition of
medical
witness.
Identification
report of
Magistrate.
Evidence of
officers of
Mint.

(b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test applied by him in the course
of the examination of the matter or thing.
329. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government
scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to
him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this
Sanhita, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the
subject-matter of his report.
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court, and he is unable to attend
personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute
any responsible officer working with him to attend the Court, if such officer is conversant
with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf.
(4) This section applies to the following Government scientific experts, namely:—
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government;
(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives;
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;
(d) the Director, Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;
(e) the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director of a Central Forensic
Science Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory;
(f) the Serologist to the Government;
(g) any other scientific expert specified or certified, by notification, by the State
Government or the Central Government for this purpose.
330. (1) Where any document is filed before any Court by the prosecution or the
accused, the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and the prosecution
or the accused or the advocate for the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called
upon to admit or deny the genuineness of each such document soon after supply of such
documents and in no case later than thirty days after such supply:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, relax the time limit with reasons to be
recorded in writing:
Provided further that no expert shall be called to appear before the Court unless the
report of such expert is disputed by any of the parties to the trial.
(2) The list of documents shall be in such form as the State Government may, by rules,
provide.
(3) Where the genuineness of any document is not disputed, such document may be
read in evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita without proof of
the signature of the person by whom it purports to be signed:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require such signature to be proved.
331. When any application is made to any Court in the course of any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Sanhita, and allegations are made therein respecting any public
servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit,
and the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be so given.
332. (1) The evidence of any person whose evidence is of a formal character may be
given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any inquiry,
trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or
the accused, summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.
Reports of
certain
Government
scientific
experts.
No formal
proof of
certain
documents.
Evidence of
formal
character on
affidavit.
Affidavit in
proof of
conduct of
public
servants.

333. (1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under this Sanhita may be sworn or
affirmed before—
(a) any Judge or Judicial or Executive Magistrate; or
(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court or Court of Session; or
(c) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952.
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state separately, such facts as the deponent
is able to prove from his own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground to
believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent shall clearly state the grounds of such
belief.
(3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant matter in the affidavit to be
struck out or amended.
334. In any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, a previous conviction
or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode provided by any law for the time
being in force,—
(a) by an extract certified under the hand of the officer having the custody of
the records of the Court in which such conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy
of the sentence or order; or
(b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed by the officer in charge
of the jail in which the punishment or any part thereof was undergone, or by production
of the warrant of commitment under which the punishment was suffered,
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with
the person so convicted or acquitted.
335. (1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and that there is no
immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try, or commit for trial, such
person for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any)
produced on behalf of the prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition
may, on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against him on the inquiry into, or
trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving
evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without an amount of
delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be
unreasonable.
(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life has
been committed by some person or persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions
Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the first class shall hold an inquiry and examine any
witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any depositions so taken
may be given in evidence against any person who is subsequently accused of the offence,
if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.
336. Where any document or report prepared by a public servant, scientific expert or
medical officer is purported to be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under this Sanhita, and—
(i) such public servant, expert or officer is either transferred, retired, or died; or
(ii) such public servant, expert or officer cannot be found or is incapable of
giving deposition; or
(iii) securing presence of such public servant, expert or officer is likely to cause
delay in holding the inquiry, trial or other proceeding,
the Court shall secure presence of successor officer of such public servant, expert, or
officer who is holding that post at the time of such deposition to give deposition on such
document or report:
Provided that no public servant, scientific expert or medical officer shall be called to
appear before the Court unless the report of such public servant, scientific expert or medical
officer is disputed by any of the parties of the trial or other proceedings:
Authorities
before whom
affidavits may
be sworn.
Previous
conviction or
acquittal how
proved.
Evidence of
public
servants,
experts, police
officers in
certain cases.
Record of
evidence in
absence of
accused.
53 of 1952.

Provided further that the deposition of such successor public servant, expert or
officer may be allowed through audio-video electronic means.
CHAPTER XXVI
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
337. (1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an
offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal
remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts
for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have
been made under sub-section (1) of section 244, or for which he might have been convicted
under sub-section (2) thereof.
(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the
consent of the State Government, for any distinct offence for which a separate charge might
have been made against him at the former trial under sub-section (1) of section 243.
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences
which, together with such act, constituted a different offence from that of which he was
convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last-mentioned offence, if the consequences
had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at the time when he
was convicted.
(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may,
notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction, be subsequently charged with, and tried for,
any other offence constituted by the same acts which he may have committed if the Court
by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is subsequently
charged.
(5) A person discharged under section 281 shall not be tried again for the same
offence except with the consent of the Court by which he was discharged or of any other
Court to which the first-mentioned Court is subordinate.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 or of section 208 of this Sanhita.
Explanation.—The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not
an acquittal for the purposes of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and acquitted. He cannot afterwards,
while the acquittal remains in force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same
facts, with theft simply, or with criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted. The person injured afterwards
dies. A may be tried again for culpable homicide.
(c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of the culpable homicide
of B. A may not afterwards be tried on the same facts for the murder of B.
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of,
voluntarily causing hurt to B. A may not afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous
hurt to B on the same facts, unless the case comes within sub-section (3) of this section.
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and convicted by him of,
theft of property from the person of B. A may subsequently be charged with, and tried for,
robbery on the same facts.
(f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of,
robbing D. A, B and C may afterwards be charged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same facts.
338. (1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may
appear and plead without any written authority before any Court in which that case is under
inquiry, trial or appeal.
Person once
convicted or
acquitted not
to be tried for
same offence.
10 of 1897.
Appearance
by Public
Prosecutors.

(2) If in any such case any private person instructs his advocate to prosecute any
person in any Court, the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the
case shall conduct the prosecution, and the advocate so instructed shall act therein under
the directions of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, with the
permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the evidence is closed
in the case.
339. (1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may permit the prosecution to
be conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of inspector; but no
person, other than the Advocate-General or Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor
or Assistant Public Prosecutor, shall be entitled to do so without such permission:
Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the prosecution if he has
taken part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is being
prosecuted.
(2) Any person conducting the prosecution may do so personally or by an advocate.
340. Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court, or against whom
proceedings are instituted under this Sanhita, may of right be defended by an advocate of
his choice.
341. (1) Where, in a trial or appeal before a Court, the accused is not represented by
an advocate, and where it appears to the Court that the accused has not sufficient means to
engage an advocate, the Court shall assign an advocate for his defence at the expense of
the State.
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make
rules providing for—
(a) the mode of selecting advocates for defence under sub-section (1);
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such advocates by the Courts;
(c) the fees payable to such advocates by the Government, and generally, for
carrying out the purposes of sub-section (1).
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as from such date as may
be specified in the notification, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in
relation to any class of trials before other Courts in the State as they apply in relation to
trials before Courts of Session.
342. (1) In this section, "corporation" means an incorporated company or other body
corporate, and includes a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
(2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an
inquiry or trial, it may appoint a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and
such appointment need not be under the seal of the corporation.
(3) Where a representative of a corporation appears, any requirement of this Sanhita
that anything shall be done in the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated or
explained to the accused, shall be construed as a requirement that that thing shall be done
in the presence of the representative or read or stated or explained to the representative,
and any requirement that the accused shall be examined shall be construed as a requirement
that the representative shall be examined.
(4) Where a representative of a corporation does not appear, any such requirement as
is referred to in sub-section (3) shall not apply.
Permission to
conduct
prosecution.
Right of
person against
whom
proceedings
are instituted
to be
defended.
Legal aid to
accused at
State expense
in certain
cases.
Procedure
when
corporation or
registered
society is an
accused.
21 of 1860.

(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the managing director of
the corporation or by any person duly authorised by him (by whatever name called) having,
or being one of the persons having the management of the affairs of the corporation to the
effect that the person named in the statement has been appointed as the representative of
the corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court shall, unless the contrary
is proved, presume that such person has been so appointed.
(6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as the representative of
a corporation in an inquiry or trial before a Court is or is not such representative, the
question shall be determined by the Court.
343. (1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have been
directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section applies, the
Chief Judicial Magistrate at any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the
offence, and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring into or trying the offence, at any
stage of the inquiry or trial, may tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making
a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances within his knowledge relative to
the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in the
commission thereof.
(2) This section applies to—
(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by the Court of a
Special Judge appointed under any other law for the time being in force;
(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years
or with a more severe sentence.
(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub-section (1) shall record—
(a) his reasons for so doing;
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was
made,
and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free
of cost.
(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1)—
(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate taking cognizance
of the offence and in the subsequent trial, if any;
(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until the termination
of the trial.
(5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1) and
has been examined under sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence
shall, without making any further inquiry in the case—
(a) commit it for trial—
(i) to the Court of Session if the offence is triable exclusively by that
Court or if the Magistrate taking cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under any other law for the time
being in force, if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court;
(b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate who
shall try the case himself.
344. At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is passed, the Court
to which the commitment is made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of
any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such
offence, tender a pardon on the same condition to such person.
Tender of
pardon to
accomplice.
Power to
direct tender
of pardon.

345. (1) Where, in regard to a person who has accepted a tender of pardon made
under section 343 or section 344, the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion such
person has, either by wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not
complied with the condition on which the tender was made, such person may be tried for the
offence in respect of which the pardon was so tendered or for any other offence of which he
appears to have been guilty in connection with the same matter, and also for the offence of
giving false evidence:
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused:
Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence of giving false
evidence except with the sanction of the High Court, and nothing contained in section 215
or section 379 shall apply to that offence.
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded
by a Magistrate under section 183 or by a Court under sub-section (4) of section 343 may be
given in evidence against him at such trial.
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the
condition upon which such tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecution
to prove that the condition has not been complied with.
(4) At such trial, the Court shall—
(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and explained to the
accused;
(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence of the witnesses for the
prosecution is taken,
ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the
tender of pardon was made.
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the
trial and it shall, before passing judgment in the case, find whether or not the accused has
complied with the conditions of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complied, it shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita, pass judgment of acquittal.
346. (1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day
basis until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 64,
section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 the inquiry or trial shall be completed within a period of two months
from the date of filing of the chargesheet.
(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds
it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial,
it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand
the accused if in custody:
Provided that no Court shall remand an accused person to custody under this
section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or
postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except for special reasons to be
recorded in writing:
Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of enabling
the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him:
Trial of
person not
complying
with
conditions of
pardon.
Power to
postpone or
adjourn
proceedings.

Provided also that—
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the
circumstances are beyond the control of that party;
(b) where the circumstances are beyond the control of a party, not more than
two adjournments may be granted by the Court after hearing the objections of the
other party and for the reasons to be recorded in writing;
(c) the fact that the advocate of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be
a ground for adjournment;
(d) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his advocate is not present
or the party or his advocate though present in Court, is not ready to examine or
cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record the statement of the
witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in-chief
or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be.
Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a suspicion that
the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears likely that further evidence may
be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand.
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be granted
include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the accused.
347. (1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other
proceeding, after due notice to the parties, visit and inspect any place in which an offence
is alleged to have been committed, or any other place which it is in his opinion necessary to
view for the purpose of properly appreciating the evidence given at such inquiry or trial,
and shall without unnecessary delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts observed
at such inspection.
(2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of the case and if the prosecutor,
complainant or accused or any other party to the case, so desires, a copy of the memorandum
shall be furnished to him free of cost.
348. Any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
Sanhita, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in attendance, though not
summoned as a witness, or re-call and re-examine any person already examined; and the
Court shall summon and examine or re-call and re-examine any such person if his evidence
appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case.
349. If a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any
investigation or proceeding under this Sanhita, it is expedient to direct any person, including
an accused person, to give specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or
voice sample, he may make an order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the
order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time and place specified in such order
and shall give his specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or voice sample:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some
time been arrested in connection with such investigation or proceeding:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing,
order any person to give such specimen or sample without him being arrested.
350. Subject to any rules made by the State Government, any Criminal Court may, if it
thinks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any
complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
before such Court under this Sanhita.
Local
inspection.
Power to
summon
material
witness, or
examine
person
present.
Power of
Magistrate to
order person
to give
specimen
signatures or
handwriting,
etc.
Expenses of
complainants
and witnesses.

351. (1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused personally
to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court—
(a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused put such questions
to him as the Court considers necessary;
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before
he is called on for his defence, question him generally on the case:
Provided that in a summons case, where the Court has dispensed with the
personal attendance of the accused, it may also dispense with his examination under
clause (b).
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined under
sub-section (1).
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing to answer
such questions, or by giving false answers to them.
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration in such
inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for,
any other offence which such answers may tend to show he has committed.
(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing relevant
questions which are to be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing of written
statement by the accused as sufficient compliance of this section.
352. (1) Any party to a proceeding may, as soon as may be, after the close of his
evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, before he concludes the oral arguments,
if any, submit a memorandum to the Court setting forth concisely and under distinct headings,
the arguments in support of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the
record.
(2) A copy of every such memorandum shall be simultaneously furnished to the
opposite party.
(3) No adjournment of the proceedings shall be granted for the purpose of filing the
written arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it
necessary to grant such adjournment.
(4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral arguments are not concise or
relevant, regulate such arguments.
353. (1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court shall be a competent
witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges made
against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial:
Provided that—
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing;
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by
any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any
person charged together with him at the same trial.
(2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted in any Criminal Court under
section 101, or section 126, or section 127, or section 128, or section 129, or under
Chapter X or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter XI, may offer himself as a witness in
such proceedings:
Provided that in proceedings under section 127, section 128, or section 129, the
failure of such person to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by
any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any presumption against him or any other
person proceeded against together with him at the same inquiry.
Power to
examine
accused.
Oral
arguments and
memorandum
of arguments.
Accused
person to be
competent
witness.

354. Except as provided in sections 343 and 344, no influence, by means of any
promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused person to induce him to disclose
or withhold any matter within his knowledge.
355. (1) At any stage of an inquiry or trial under this Sanhita, if the Judge or Magistrate
is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that the personal attendance of the accused before
the Court is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that the accused persistently
disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented
by an advocate, dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in his
absence, and may, at any subsequent stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance
of such accused.
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by an advocate, or if the Judge
or Magistrate considers his personal attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for
reasons to be recorded by him, either adjourn such inquiry or trial, or order that the case of
such accused be taken up or tried separately.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, personal attendance of the accused
includes attendance through audio-video electronic means.
356. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita or in any other law for
the time being in force, when a person declared as a proclaimed offender, whether or not
charged jointly, has absconded to evade trial and there is no immediate prospect of arresting
him, it shall be deemed to operate as a waiver of the right of such person to be present and
tried in person, and the Court shall, after recording reasons in writing, in the interest of
justice, proceed with the trial in the like manner and with like effect as if he was present,
under this Sanhita and pronounce the judgment:
Provided that the Court shall not commence the trial unless a period of ninety days
has lapsed from the date of framing of the charge.
(2) The Court shall ensure that the following procedure has been complied with
before proceeding under sub-section (1), namely:—
(i) issuance of two consecutive warrants of arrest within the interval of at least
thirty days;
(ii) publish in a national or local daily newspaper circulating in the place of his
last known address of residence, requiring the proclaimed offender to appear before
the Court for trial and informing him that in case he fails to appear within thirty days
from the date of such publication, the trial shall commence in his absence;
(iii) inform his relative or friend, if any, about the commencement of the
trial; and
(iv) affix information about the commencement of the trial on some conspicuous
part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily resides and display in
the police station of the district of his last known address of residence.
(3) Where the proclaimed offender is not represented by any advocate, he shall be
provided with an advocate for his defence at the expense of the State.
(4) Where the Court, competent to try the case or commit for trial, has examined any
witnesses for prosecution and recorded their depositions, such depositions shall be given
in evidence against such proclaimed offender on the inquiry into, or in trial for, the offence
with which he is charged:
Provided that if the proclaimed offender is arrested and produced or appears before
the Court during such trial, the Court may, in the interest of justice, allow him to examine any
evidence which may have been taken in his absence.
No influence
to be used to
induce
disclosure.
Provision for
inquiries and
trial being held
in absence of
accused in
certain cases.
Inquiry, trial
or judgment in
absentia of
proclaimed
offender.

(5) Where a trial is related to a person under this section, the deposition and
examination of the witness, may, as far as practicable, be recorded by audio-video electronic
means preferably mobile phone and such recording shall be kept in such manner as the
Court may direct.
(6) In prosecution for offences under this Sanhita, voluntary absence of accused
after the trial has commenced under sub-section (1) shall not prevent continuing the trial
including the pronouncement of the judgment even if he is arrested and produced or appears
at the conclusion of such trial.
(7) No appeal shall lie against the judgment under this section unless the proclaimed
offender presents himself before the Court of appeal:
Provided that no appeal against conviction shall lie after the expiry of three years
from the date of the judgment.
(8) The State may, by notification, extend the provisions of this section to any
absconder mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 84.
357. If the accused, though not a person of unsound mind, cannot be made to
understand the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the
case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the
proceedings shall be forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the
case, and the High Court shall pass thereon such order as it thinks fit.
358. (1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from
the evidence that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which
such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed against such
person for the offence which he appears to have committed.
(2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested or summoned,
as the circumstances of the case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.
(3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons,
may be detained by such Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence
which he appears to have committed.
(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1), then—
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and
the witnesses re-heard;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may proceed as if such
person had been an accused person when the Court took cognizance of the offence
upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced.
359. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be
compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:—
TABLE
Offence
Section of the Bharatiya
Person by whom offence
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 applicable
may be compounded
Enticing or taking away or
The husband of the woman
detaining with criminal
and the woman.
intent a married woman.
Procedure
where accused
does not
understand
proceedings.
Power to
proceed
against other
persons
appearing to
be guilty of
offence.
Compounding
of offences.

Voluntarily causing hurt.
115(2)
The person to whom the hurt
is caused.
Voluntarily causing hurt on
122(1)
The person to whom the hurt
provocation.
is caused.
Voluntarily causing grievous
122(2)
The person to whom the hurt
hurt on grave and sudden
is caused.
provocation.
Wrongfully restraining or
126(2), 127(2)
The person restrained or
confining any person.
confined.
Wrongfully confining a
127(3)
The person confined.
person for three days or
more.
Wrongfully confining a
127(4)
The person confined.
person for ten days or more.
Wrongfully confining a
127(6)
The person confined.
person in secret.
Assault or use of criminal
131, 133,136
The person assaulted or to
force.
whom criminal force is used.
Uttering words, etc., with
The person whose religious
deliberate intent to wound
feelings are intended to be
the religious feelings of
wounded.
any person.
Theft.
303(2)
The owner of the property
stolen.
Dishonest misappropriation
The owner of the property
of property.
misappropriated.
Criminal breach of trust by
316(3)
The owner of the property in
a carrier, wharfinger, etc.
respect of which the breach
of trust has been committed.
Dishonestly receiving stolen
317(2)
The owner of the property
property knowing it to be
stolen.
stolen.
Assisting in the concealment
317(5)
The owner of the property
or disposal of stolen property,
stolen.
knowing it to be stolen.
Cheating.
318(2)
The person cheated.
Cheating by personation.
319(2)
The person cheated.
Fraudulent removal or
The creditors who are
concealment of property,
affected thereby.
etc., to prevent distribution
among creditors.
Fraudulently preventing
The creditors who are
from being made available
affected thereby.
for his creditors a debt or
demand due to the offender.
Fraudulent execution of
The person affected thereby.
deed of transfer containing
false statement of
consideration.

Fraudulent removal or
The person affected thereby.
concealment of property.
Mischief, when the only
324(2), 324(4)
The person to whom the loss
loss or damage caused is
or damage is caused.
loss or damage to a private
person.
Mischief by killing or
The owner of the animal.
maiming animal.
Mischief by injury to
326(a)
The person to whom the loss
works of irrigation by
or damage is caused.
wrongfully diverting
water when the only
loss or damage caused
is loss or damage to
private person.
Criminal trespass.
329(3)
The person in possession of
the property trespassed upon.
House-trespass.
329(4)
The person in possession of
the property trespassed upon.
House-trespass to commit
332(c)
The person in possession of
an offence (other than theft)
the house trespassed upon.
punishable with imprisonment.
Using a false trade or property mark.
345(3)
The person to whom loss or
injury is caused by such use.
Counterfeiting a property
347(1)
The person to whom loss or
mark used by another.
injury is caused by such use.
Selling goods marked with
The person to whom loss or
a counterfeit property mark.
injury is caused by such use.
Criminal intimidation.
351(2), 351(3)
The person intimidated.
Insult intended to provoke
The person insulted.
a breach of peace.
Inducing person to believe
The person induced.
himself an object of divine
displeasure.
Defamation, except such
356(2)
The person defamed.
cases as are specified against
section 356(2) of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
column 1 of the Table under
sub-section (2).
Printing or engraving matter,
356(3)
The person defamed.
knowing it to be defamatory.
Sale of printed or engraved
356(4)
The person defamed.
substance containing
defamatory matter, knowing
it to contain such matter.
Criminal breach of contract
The person with whom the
of service.
offender has contracted.

(2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the
Court before which any prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by the
persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:—
Table
Offence
Section of the Bharatiya
Person by whom offence
Nyaya Sanhita applicable
may be compounded
Word, gesture or act
The woman whom it was
intended to insult the
intended to insult or whose
modesty of a woman.
privacy was intruded upon.
Marrying again during the
82(1)
The husband or wife of the
life-time of a husband or wife.
person so marrying.
Causing miscarriage.
The woman to whom
miscarriage is caused.
Voluntarily causing grievous
117(2)
The person to whom hurt is
hurt.
caused.
Causing hurt by doing an
125(a)
The person to whom hurt is
act so rashly and negligently
caused.
as to endanger human life
or the personal safety of others.
Causing grievous hurt by
125(b)
The person to whom hurt is
doing an act so rashly and
caused.
negligently as to endanger
human life or the personal
safety of others.
Assault or criminal force in
The person assaulted or to
attempting wrongfully to
whom the force was used.
confine a person.
Theft, by clerk or servant
The owner of the property
of property in possession
stolen.
of master.
Criminal breach of trust.
316(2)
The owner of the property in
respect of which breach of
trust has been committed.
Criminal breach of trust by
316(4)
The owner of the property in
a clerk or servant.
respect of which the breach
of trust has been committed.
Cheating a person whose
318(3)
The person cheated.
interest the offender was
bound, either by law or by
legal contract, to protect.
Cheating and dishonestly
318(4)
The person cheated.
inducing delivery of
property or the making,
alteration or destruction
of a valuable security.
Defamation against the
356(2)
The person defamed.
President or the Vice-President
or the Governor of the State
or the Administrator of the
Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his
public functions when
instituted upon a complaint
made by the public prosecutor.

(3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such
offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence) or
where the accused is liable under sub-section (5) of section 3 or section 190 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, may be compounded in like manner.
(4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence
under this section is a child or of unsound mind, any person competent to contract on his
behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence;
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence
under this section is dead, the legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 of such person may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.
(5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted
and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave
of the Court to which he is committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to
be heard.
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its powers of revision
under section 442 may allow any person to compound any offence which such person is
competent to compound under this section.
(7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason of a previous
conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for
such offence.
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an
acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded.
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section.
360. The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may,
with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw
from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the
offences for which he is tried; and, upon such withdrawal,—
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged
in respect of such offence or offences;
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Sanhita no
charge is required, he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences:
Provided that where such offence—
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
Union extends; or
(ii) was investigated under any Central Act; or
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property
belonging to the Central Government; or
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
and the Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government,
he shall not, unless he has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the
Court for its consent to withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according
consent, direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission granted by the Central
Government to withdraw from the prosecution:
Provided further that no Court shall allow such withdrawal without giving an
opportunity of being heard to the victim in the case.
5 of 1908.
Withdrawal
from
prosecution.

361. (1) If, in the course of any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate in
any district, the evidence appears to him to warrant a presumption—
(a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial; or
(b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed for trial by some
other Magistrate in the district; or
(c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
he shall stay the proceedings and submit the case, with a brief report explaining its nature,
to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such other Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the
Chief Judicial Magistrate directs.
(2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the
case himself, or refer it to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit
the accused for trial.
362. If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him
at any stage of the proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which
ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the
provisions hereinbefore contained and thereupon the provisions of Chapter XIX shall
apply to the commitment so made.
363. (1) Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under
Chapter X or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with imprisonment for a
term of three years or upwards, is again accused of any offence punishable under either of
those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, and the Magistrate
before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for presuming that such
person has committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate
or committed to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and
is of opinion that he can himself pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted.
(2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to
the Court of Session under sub-section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the
same inquiry or trial shall be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges
such other person under section 262 or section 268, as the case may be.
364. (1) Whenever a Magistrate is of opinion, after hearing the evidence for the
prosecution and the accused, that the accused is guilty, and that he ought to receive a
punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which such Magistrate is
empowered to inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion that the
accused ought to be required to execute a bond or bail bond under section 125, he may
record the opinion and submit his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the Chief
Judicial Magistrate to whom he is subordinate.
(2) When more accused persons than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate
considers it necessary to proceed under sub-section (1), in regard to any of such accused,
he shall forward all the accused, who are in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he
thinks fit, examine the parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given
evidence in the case and may call for and take any further evidence and shall pass such
judgment, sentence or order in the case as he thinks fit, and is according to law.
365. (1) Whenever any Judge or Magistrate, after having heard and recorded the
whole or any part of the evidence in any inquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction
therein and is succeeded by another Judge or Magistrate who has and who exercises such
jurisdiction, the Judge or Magistrate so succeeding may act on the evidence so recorded by
his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself:
Procedure in
cases which
Magistrate
cannot dispose
of.
Procedure
when after
commencement
of inquiry or
trial,
Magistrate
finds case
should be
committed.
Trial of
persons
previously
convicted of
offences
against
coinage,
stamp-law or
property.
Procedure
when
Magistrate
cannot pass
sentence
sufficiently
severe.
Conviction or
commitment
on evidence
partly recorded
by one
Magistrate and
partly by
another.

Provided that if the succeeding Judge or Magistrate is of the opinion that further
examination of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary
in the interests of justice, he may re-summon any such witness, and after such further
examination, cross-examination and re-examination, if any, as he may permit, the witness
shall be discharged.
(2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Sanhita from one Judge to
another Judge or from one Magistrate to another Magistrate, the former shall be deemed to
cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be succeeded by the latter, within the meaning
of sub-section (1).
(3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which proceedings
have been stayed under section 361 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a
superior Magistrate under section 364.
366. (1) The place in which any Criminal Court is held for the purpose of inquiring into
or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally
may have access, so far as the same can conveniently contain them:
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any
stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any particular case, that the public generally, or any
particular person, shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used by
the Court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the inquiry into and trial
of rape or an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68,
section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or
section 10 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be conducted
in camera:
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by
either of the parties, allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, the
room or building used by the Court:
Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a
woman Judge or Magistrate.
(3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it shall not be lawful for
any person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except with
the previous permission of the Court:
Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in relation to an
offence of rape may be lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of
the parties.
CHAPTER XXVII
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND
367. (1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to believe that the person
against whom the inquiry is being held is a person of unsound mind and consequently
incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such
unsoundness of mind, and shall cause such person to be examined by the civil surgeon of
the district or such other medical officer as the State Government may direct, and thereupon
shall examine such surgeon or other medical officer as a witness, and shall reduce the
examination to writing.
(2) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be a person of unsound mind, he shall
refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist of Government hospital or
Government medical college for care, treatment and prognosis of the condition and the
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether
the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or intellectual disability:
Court to be
open.
Procedure in
case of
accused being
person of
unsound mind.
32 of 2012.

Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric
or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal
before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest Government medical college.
(3) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person
in accordance with the provisions of section 369.
(4) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) is a
person of unsound mind, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the unsoundness
of mind renders the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so
incapable, the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall examine the record
of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but
without questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against
the accused, he shall, instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal
with him in the manner provided under section 369:
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the
accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone
the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist,
is required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to be dealt with as
provided under section 369.
(5) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) is a
person with intellectual disability, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the
intellectual disability renders the accused incapable of entering defence, and if the accused
is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal with the
accused in the manner provided under section 369.
368. (1) If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court of Session, it appears
to the Magistrate or Court that such person is of unsound mind and consequently incapable
of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact of such
unsoundness of mind and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering such
medical and other evidence as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he
or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall postpone further proceedings in the case.
(2) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Session finds the accused to be of
unsound mind, he or it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for
care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall
report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of
mind:
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatrist
or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal
before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest Government medical college.
(3) If the Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2)
is a person of unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether the
unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused
is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding to that effect and shall
examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate
of the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no
prima facie case is made out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the
trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under section 369:
Procedure in
case of person
of unsound
mind tried
before Court.

Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he
shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.
(4) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the
accused and he is incapable of entering defence by reason of intellectual disability, he or it
shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt with in accordance with section 369.
369. (1) Whenever a person if found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable
of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or intellectual disability, the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be
taken or not, order release of such person on bail:
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or intellectual
disability which does not mandate in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to
obtain regular out-patient psychiatric treatment from the nearest medical facility and to
prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person.
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case
may be, bail cannot be granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall
order the accused to be kept in such a place where regular psychiatric treatment can be
provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government:
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health
establishment shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State
Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable of
entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or intellectual disability, the Magistrate
or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the nature of the act committed and the
extent of unsoundness of mind or intellectual disability, further determine if the release of
the accused can be ordered:
Provided that—
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate
or Court, as the case may be, decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided
under section 367 or section 368, such release may be ordered, if sufficient security is
given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other
person;
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of the opinion that discharge
of the accused cannot be ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility
for persons with unsoundness of mind or intellectual disability may be ordered wherein
the accused may be provided care and appropriate education and training.
370. (1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 367 or section 368,
the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned has
ceased to be of unsound mind, resume the inquiry or trial and require the accused to appear
or be brought before such Magistrate or Court.
(2) When the accused has been released under section 369, and the sureties for his
appearance produce him to the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this
behalf, the certificate of such officer that the accused is capable of making his defence shall
be receivable in evidence.
371. (1) If, when the accused appears or is again brought before the Magistrate or
Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of making his
defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed.
(2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his
defence, the Magistrate or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 367 or
section 368, as the case may be, and if the accused is found to be of unsound mind and
consequently incapable of making his defence, shall deal with such accused in accordance
with the provisions of section 369.
Release of
person of
unsound mind
pending
investigation
or trial.
Resumption of
inquiry or
trial.
Procedure on
accused
appearing
before
Magistrate or
Court.
10 of 2017.

372. When the accused appears to be of sound mind at the time of inquiry or trial, and
the Magistrate is satisfied from the evidence given before him that there is reason to believe
that the accused committed an act, which, if he had been of sound mind, would have been
an offence, and that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act or that it was wrong or
contrary to law, the Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the accused ought to be
tried by the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session.
373. Whenever any person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he
is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of unsoundness of mind,
incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was
wrong or contrary to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or
not.
374. (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused person committed the act
alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which the trial has been held, shall, if such
act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence,—
(a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner
as the Magistrate or Court thinks fit; or
(b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or friend of such person.
(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health establishment
shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (1) otherwise than in accordance with such
rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on
his giving security to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court that the person delivered
shall—
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to
any other person;
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places,
as the State Government may direct.
(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken
under sub-section (1).
375. The State Government may empower the officer in charge of the jail in which a
person is confined under the provisions of section 369 or section 374 to discharge all or any
of the functions of the Inspector-General of Prisons under section 376 or section 377.
376. If a person is detained under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 369,
and in the case of a person detained in a jail, the Inspector-General of Prisons, or, in the case
of a person detained in a public mental health establishment, the Mental Health Review
Board constituted under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, shall certify that, in his or their
opinion, such person is capable of making his defence, he shall be taken before the Magistrate
or Court, as the case may be, at such time as the Magistrate or Court appoints, and the
Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person under the provisions of section 371; and
the certificate of such Inspector-General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as
evidence.
377. (1) If a person is detained under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 369,
or section 374, and such Inspector-General or visitors shall certify that, in his or their
judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other
person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be released, or to be detained in
custody, or to be transferred to a public mental health establishment if he has not been
already sent to such establishment; and, in case it orders him to be transferred to a public
mental health establishment, may appoint a Commission, consisting of a Judicial and two
medical officers.
When accused
appears to
have been of
sound mind.
Judgment of
acquittal on
ground of
unsoundness
of mind.
Person
acquitted on
ground of
unsoundness
of mind to be
detained in
safe custody.
Power of State
Government
to empower
officer in
charge to
discharge.
Procedure
where prisoner
of unsound
mind is
reported
capable of
making his
defence.
Procedure
where person
of unsound
mind detained
is declared fit
to be released.
10 of 2017.
10 of 2017.

(2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such
person, take such evidence as is necessary, and shall report to the State Government, which
may order his release or detention as it thinks fit.
378. (1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person detained under the provisions
of section 369 or section 374 desires that he shall be delivered to his care and custody, the
State Government may, upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving
security to the satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall—
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to
any other person;
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places,
as the State Government may direct;
(c) in the case of a person detained under sub-section (2) of section 369, be
produced when required before such Magistrate or Court,
order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.
(2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been
postponed by reason of his being of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence,
and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), certifies at any time to
the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, such Magistrate
or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to
produce him before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon such production the Magistrate or
Court shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 371, and the certificate of
the inspecting officer shall be receivable as evidence.
CHAPTER XXVIII
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
379. (1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court
is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made
into any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 215, which appears to
have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in
respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court, such
Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,—
(a) record a finding to that effect;
(b) make a complaint thereof in writing;
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such
Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary
so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate.
(2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect of an offence may,
in any case where that Court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect
of that offence nor rejected an application for the making of such complaint, be exercised by
the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4)
of section 215.
(3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed,—
(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the
Court as the Court may appoint;
(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of
the Court as the Court may authorise in writing in this behalf.
(4) In this section, "Court" has the same meaning as in section 215.
Delivery of
person of
unsound mind
to care of
relative or
friend.
Procedure in
cases
mentioned in
section 215.

380. (1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has
refused to make a complaint under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 379, or
against whom such a complaint has been made by such Court, may appeal to the Court to
which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of
section 215, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned,
direct the withdrawal of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making of the complaint which
such former Court might have made under section 379, and, if it makes such complaint, the
provisions of that section shall apply accordingly.
(2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under
section 379, shall be final, and shall not be subject to revision.
381. Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under
section 379 or an appeal under section 380, shall have power to make such order as to costs
as may be just.
382. (1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under section 379 or section 380
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XVI, proceed, as far as may be, to
deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police report.
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to
whom the case may have been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision
arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of which the matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks
fit, at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided.
383. (1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or final order disposing of any
judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class expresses an opinion
to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given
false evidence or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such evidence should
be used in such proceeding, it or he may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the
interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily for giving or fabricating, as the
case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the
offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for
such offence, try such offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the
procedure prescribed for summary trials.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court to make a complaint
under section 379 for the offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section.
(4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub-section (1), it is made to appear to
the Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class that an appeal or an application for
revision has been preferred or filed against the judgment or order in which the opinion
referred to in that sub-section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further proceedings of
the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be,
and thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results of the appeal or
application for revision.
384. (1) When any such offence as is described in section 210, section 213,
section 214, section 215 or section 267 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is committed in
the view or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the
offender to be detained in custody, and may, at any time before the rising of the Court on the
same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence
the offender to fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, and, in default of payment of fine,
to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be
sooner paid.
Appeal.
Power to
order costs.
Procedure of
Magistrate
taking
cognizance.
Summary
procedure for
trial for giving
false evidence.
Procedure in
certain cases
of contempt.

(2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with
the statement (if any) made by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence.
(3) If the offence is under section 267 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the record
shall show the nature and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or
insulted was sitting, and the nature of the interruption or insult.
385. (1) If the Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the
offences referred to in section 384 and committed in its view or presence should be imprisoned
otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two hundred rupees
should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that the case
should not be disposed of under section 384, such Court, after recording the facts
constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as hereinbefore provided, may
forward the case to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same, and may require
security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient
security is not given, shall forward such person in custody to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to
deal with, as far as may be, as if it were instituted on a police report.
386. When the State Government so directs, any Registrar or any Sub-Registrar
appointed under the Registration Act, 1908, shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the
meaning of sections 384 and 385.
387. When any Court has under section 384 adjudged an offender to punishment, or
has under section 385 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to do
anything which he was lawfully required to do or for any intentional insult or interruption,
the Court may, in its discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his
submission to the order or requisition of such Court, or on apology being made to its
satisfaction.
388. If any witness or person called to produce a document or thing before a Criminal
Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to him or to produce any document or
thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and does not,
after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to do, offer any reasonable excuse
for such refusal, such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to
simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge
commit him to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not exceeding seven days,
unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce
the document or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with
according to the provisions of section 384 or section 385.
389. (1) If any witness being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally
bound to appear at a certain place and time in obedience to the summons and without just
excuse neglects or refuses to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he
has to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court before
which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it is expedient in the interests of justice that
such a witness should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and
after giving the offender an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished
under this section, sentence him to fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the
procedure prescribed for summary trials.
390. (1) Any person sentenced by any Court other than a High Court under section 383,
section 384, section 388, or section 389 may, notwithstanding anything contained in this
Sanhita appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily
appealable.
Procedure
where Court
considers that
case should
not be dealt
with under
section 384.
When
Registrar or
Sub-Registrar
to be deemed a
Civil Court.
Discharge of
offender on
submission of
apology.
Imprisonment
or committal
of person
refusing to
answer or
produce
document.
Summary
procedure for
punishment
for nonattendance by
a witness in
obedience to
summons.
Appeals from
convictions
under sections
383, 384, 388
and 389.
16 of 1908.

(2) The provisions of Chapter XXXI shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to
appeals under this section, and the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or
reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against.
(3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court
of Session for the sessions division within which such Court is situate.
(4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub-Registrar deemed to be a
Civil Court by virtue of a direction issued under section 386 shall lie to the Court of Session
for the sessions division within which the office of such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is
situate.
391. Except as provided in sections 383, 384, 388 and 389, no Judge of a Criminal Court
(other than a Judge of a High Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for any offence
referred to in section 215, when such offence is committed before himself or in contempt of
his authority, or is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the course of a
judicial proceeding.
CHAPTER XXIX
THE JUDGMENT
392. (1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall
be pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of
the trial or at some subsequent time not later than forty-five days of which notice shall be
given to the parties or their advocates,—
(a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or
(b) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or
(c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance
of the judgment in a language which is understood by the accused or his advocate.
(2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the presiding
officer shall cause it to be taken down in short-hand, sign the transcript and every page
thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the date of the delivery of the judgment
in open Court.
(3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause (b) or
clause (c) of sub-section (1), as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the
presiding officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his own hand, every page of the
judgment shall be signed by him.
(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of
sub-section (1), the whole judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made available
for the perusal of the parties or their advocates free of cost:
Provided that the Court shall, as far as practicable, upload the copy of the judgment
on its portal within a period of seven days from the date of judgment.
(5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced
either in person or through audio-video electronic means.
(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear
the judgment pronounced, except where his personal attendance during the trial has been
dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or he is acquitted:
Provided that where there are more accused persons than one, and one or more of
them do not attend the Court on the date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the
presiding officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the disposal of the case, pronounce
the judgment notwithstanding their absence.
Certain Judges
and
Magistrates
not to try
certain
offences when
committed
before
themselves.
Judgment.

(7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by
reason only of the absence of any party or his advocate on the day or from the place
notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, or defect in serving, on the
parties or their advocates, or any of them, the notice of such day and place.
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the
provisions of section 511.
393. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, every judgment
referred to in section 392,—
(a) shall be written in the language of the Court;
(b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and
the reasons for the decision;
(c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or other law under which, the accused is convicted, and the
punishment to which he is sentenced;
(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which the accused
is acquitted and direct that he be set at liberty.
(2) When the conviction is under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it is doubtful
under which of two sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that
Sanhita the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly express the same, and pass judgment in
the alternative.
(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative,
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the
reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons
for such sentence.
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of
one year or more, but the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
three months, it shall record its reasons for awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is
one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was tried summarily under
the provisions of this Sanhita.
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be
hanged by the neck till he is dead.
(6) Every order under section 136 or sub-section (2) of section 157 and every final
order made under section 144, section 164 or section 166 shall contain the point or points for
determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision.
394. (1) When any person, having been convicted by a Court in India of an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of
any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards by any
Court other than that of a Magistrate of the second class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at
the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also order that his residence
and any change of, or absence from, such residence after release be notified as
hereinafter provided for a term not exceeding five years from the date of the expiration of
such sentence.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to criminal conspiracies to
commit such offences and to the abetment of such offences and attempts to commit them.
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become
void.
Language and
contents of
judgment.
Order for
notifying
address of
previously
convicted
offender.

(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
(5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this section relating to the notification of residence or change of, or absence from,
residence by released convicts.
(6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof and any person
charged with a breach of any such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction
in the district in which the place last notified by him as his place of residence is situated.
395. (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence
of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the whole
or any part of the fine recovered to be applied—
(a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution;
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused
by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by
such person in a Civil Court;
(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of
another person or of having abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying
compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, entitled to
recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting to them from such
death;
(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal
misappropriation, criminal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly
received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of, stolen property
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any
bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is
restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto.
(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall
be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be
presented, before the decision of the appeal.
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court
may, when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation,
such amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or
injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so sentenced.
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
(5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the
same matter, the Court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation
under this section.
396. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Government shall
prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim or his
dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require
rehabilitation.
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District
Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall
decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in
sub-section (1).
(3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation
awarded under section 395 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the cases end
Order to pay
compensation.
13 of 1855.
Victim
compensation
scheme.

in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation
for compensation.
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and
where no trial takes place, the victim or his dependents may make an application to the State
or the District Legal Services Authority for award of compensation.
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section (4),
the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award adequate
compensation by completing the enquiry within two months.
(6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate
the suffering of the victim, may order for immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits to be
made available free of cost on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the
officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other
interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.
(7) The compensation payable by the State Government under this section shall be in
addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 65, section 70 and
sub-section (1) of section 124 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
397. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the
State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-aid
or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 64,
section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71 or sub-section (1) of
section 124 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of
the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, and shall immediately inform the
police of such incident.
398. Every State Government shall prepare and notify a Witness Protection Scheme
for the State with a view to ensure protection of the witnesses.
399. (1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it
appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for
causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one
thousand rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested,
for his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like
manner, award to each of them such compensation, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as
such Magistrate thinks fit.
(3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine,
and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to
simple imprisonment for such term not exceeding thirty days as the Magistrate directs,
unless such sum is sooner paid.
400. (1) Whenever any complaint of a non-cognizable offence is made to a Court, the
Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty imposed upon him, order
him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in the prosecution,
and may further order that in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple imprisonment
for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may include any expenses incurred in
respect of process-fees, witnesses and advocate's fees which the Court may consider
reasonable.
(2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
401. (1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an
offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or
when any person under twenty-one years of age or any woman is convicted of an offence
Treatment of
victims.
Witness
protection
scheme.
Compensation
to persons
groundlessly
arrested.
Order to pay
costs in noncognizable
cases.
Order to release
on probation of
good conduct or
after
admonition.
32 of 2012.

not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved
against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being
had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which
the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on
probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any
punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a bond or bail bond to appear and
receive sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the
Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behavior:
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second
class not specially empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the
powers conferred by this section should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that
effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding the accused
to, or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case
in the manner provided by sub-section (2).
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by
sub-section (1), such Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as
he might have passed or made if the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks
further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary, he may make such
inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be made or taken.
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, dishonest
misappropriation, cheating or any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
punishable with not more than two years’ imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine
only and no previous conviction is proved against him, the Court before which he is so
convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, character, antecedents or physical or
mental condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the offence or any extenuating
circumstances under which the offence was committed, instead of sentencing him to any
punishment, release him after due admonition.
(4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High
Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
(5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any offender, the
High Court or Court of Session may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such Court,
or when exercising its powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass
sentence on such offender according to law:
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub-section
inflict a greater punishment than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the
offender was convicted.
(6) The provisions of sections 140, 143 and 414 shall, so far as may be, apply in the
case of sureties offered in pursuance of the provisions of this section.
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-section (1), shall
be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular
occupation in the place for which the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live
during the period named for the observance of the conditions.
(8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with
the offender in respect of his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to
observe any of the conditions of his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension.
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith
before the Court issuing the warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until
the case is heard or admit him to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing
for sentence and such Court may, after hearing the case, pass sentence.
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958, or the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 or any other
law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders.
20 of 1958.
2 of 2016.

402. Where in any case the Court could have dealt with,—
(a) an accused person under section 401 or under the provisions of the Probation
of Offenders Act, 1958; or
(b) a youthful offender under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment,
training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,
but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done
so.
403. Save as otherwise provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being
in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall
alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error.
404. (1) When the accused is sentenced to imprisonment, a copy of the judgment
shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him free of cost.
(2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so
desires, a translation in his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall
be given to him without delay, and such copy shall, in every case where the judgment is
appealable by the accused, be given free of cost:
Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a
certified copy of the judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost
whether or not he applies for the same.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under
section 136 as they apply in relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused.
(4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from
such judgment as of right, the Court shall inform him of the period within which, if he wishes
to appeal, his appeal should be preferred.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person affected by a judgment
or order passed by a Criminal Court shall, on an application made in this behalf and on
payment of the prescribed charges, be given a copy of such judgment or order or of any
deposition or other part of the record:
Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit for some special reason, give it to him free
of cost:
Provided further that the Court may, on an application made in this behalf by the
Prosecuting Officer, provide to the Government, free of cost, a certified copy of such
judgment, order, deposition or record.
(6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or
order of a Criminal Court to any person who is not affected by a judgment or order, on
payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to such conditions, as the High Court
may, by such rules, provide.
405. The original judgment shall be filed with the record of the proceedings and
where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and if either
party so requires, a translation thereof into the language of the Court shall be added to such
record.
406. In cases tried by the Court of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or
such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forward a copy of its or his finding and sentence
(if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held.
20 of 1958.
2 of 2016.
Special
reasons to be
recorded in
certain cases.
Court not to
alter
judgment.
Copy of
judgment to be
given to
accused and
other persons.
Judgment
when to be
translated.
Court of
Session to
send copy of
finding and
sentence to
District
Magistrate.

CHAPTER XXX
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION
407. (1) When the Court of Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall
forthwith be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence shall not be executed unless it
is confirmed by the High Court.
(2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody
under a warrant.
408. (1) If, when such proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further
inquiry should be made into, or additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the
guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take such evidence
itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session.
(2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person
may be dispensed with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken.
(3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the
result of such inquiry or evidence shall be certified to such Court.
409. In any case submitted under section 407, the High Court—
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law; or
(b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any offence of which
the Court of Session might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an
amended charge; or
(c) may acquit the accused person:
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this section until the
period allowed for preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such
period, until such appeal is disposed of.
410. In every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence
or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such Court consists of two or more Judges,
be made, passed and signed by at least two of them.
411. Where any such case is heard before a Bench of Judges and such Judges are
equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided by section 433.
412. In cases submitted by the Court of Session to the High Court for the confirmation
of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the High Court shall, without delay, after the
order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High Court, send either physically,
or through electronic means, a copy of the order, under the seal of the High Court and
attested with his official signature, to the Court of Session.
CHAPTER XXXI
APPEALS
413. No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as
provided for by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order
passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing
inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily
lies against the order of conviction of such Court.
Sentence of
death to be
submitted by
Court of
Session for
confirmation.
Power to
direct further
inquiry to be
made or
additional
evidence to be
taken.
Power of High
Court to
confirm
sentence or
annul
conviction.
Confirmation
or new
sentence to be
signed by two
Judges.
Procedure in
case of
difference of
opinion.
Procedure in
cases
submitted to
High Court for
confirmation.
No appeal to
lie unless
otherwise
provided.

414. Any person,—
(i) who has been ordered under section 136 to give security for keeping the
peace or for good behaviour; or
(ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under
section 140,
may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against
whom are laid before a Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2)
or sub-section (4) of section 141.
415. (1) Any person convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its 
original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court.
(2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions
Judge or on a trial held by any other Court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more
than seven years has been passed against him or against any other person convicted at the
same trial, may appeal to the High Court.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person,—
(a) convicted on a trial held by Magistrate of the first class, or of the second
class; or
(b) sentenced under section 364; or
(c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed
under section 401 by any Magistrate,
may appeal to the Court of Session.
(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64,
section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the
date of filing of such appeal.
416. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, where an accused person has pleaded
guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there shall be no appeal,—
(i) if the conviction is by a High Court; or
(ii) if the conviction is by a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first or second
class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence.
417. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, there shall be no appeal by a convicted
person in any of the following cases, namely:—
(a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both
such imprisonment and fine;
(b) where a Court of Session passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or of both
such imprisonment and fine;
(c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not
exceeding one hundred rupees; or
(d) where, in a case tried summarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under
section 283 passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees:
Provided that an appeal may be brought against any such sentence if any other punishment
is combined with it, but such sentence shall not be appealable merely on the ground—
Appeal from
orders
requiring
security or
refusal to
accept or
rejecting
surety for
keeping peace
or good
behaviour.
Appeals from
convictions.
No appeal in
certain cases
when accused
pleads guilty.
No appeal in
petty cases.

(i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish security to keep the peace; or
(ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in
the sentence; or
(iii) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the case, if the total amount
of fine imposed does not exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the
case.
418. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the State Government may, in
any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct the Public
Prosecutor to present an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy—
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court.
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by any
agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than
this Sanhita, the Central Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an
appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy—
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court.
(3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the ground of its
inadequacy, the Court of Session or, as the case may be, the High Court shall not enhance
the sentence except after giving to the accused a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against such enhancement and while showing cause, the accused may plead for his acquittal
or for the reduction of the sentence.
(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64,
section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the
date of filing of such appeal.
419. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions
of sub-sections (3) and (5),—
(a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal to the Court of Session from an order of acquittal passed by a
Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal
passed by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or
an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.
(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in a case in which the offence has been
investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any
Central Act other than this Sanhita, the Central Government may, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal—
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in
respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
(b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed
by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or an order
of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.
(3) No appeal to the High Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
entertained except with the leave of the High Court.
(4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and
the High Court, on an application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special
Appeal by
State
Government
against
sentence.
Appeal in case
of acquittal.

leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to
the High Court.
(5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from
an order of acquittal shall be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months,
where the complainant is a public servant, and sixty days in every other case, computed
from the date of that order of acquittal.
(6) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave
to appeal from an order of acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie
under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2).
420. Where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an
accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to imprisonment for life
or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court.
421. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, when more persons than one are
convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in respect of
any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have a right of
appeal.
422. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal to the Court of
Session or Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional
Sessions Judge:
Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the
second class may be heard and disposed of by the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(2) An Additional Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such
appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to
him or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to hear.
423. Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the
appellant or his advocate, and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is
presented otherwise directs) be accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed
against.
424. If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal and the copies
accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward
such petition and copies to the proper Appellate Court.
425. (1) If upon examining the petition of appeal and copy of the judgment received
under section 423 or section 424, the Appellate Court considers that there is no sufficient
ground for interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily:
Provided that—
(a) no appeal presented under section 423 shall be dismissed unless the appellant
or his advocate has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the
same;
(b) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed except after giving
the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same, unless
the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is frivolous or that the production of
the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as would
be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case;
(c) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed summarily until
the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired.
(2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of
the case.
Appeal against
conviction by
High Court in
certain cases.
Special right
of appeal in
certain cases.
Appeal to
Court of
Session how
heard.
Petition of
appeal.
Procedure
when appellant
in jail.
Summary
dismissal of
appeal.

(3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of
Session or of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so.
(4) Where an appeal presented under section 424 has been dismissed summarily
under this section and the Appellate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented
under section 423 on behalf of the same appellant has not been considered by it, that Court
may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 434, if satisfied that it is necessary in
the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with law.
426. (1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss the appeal summarily, it shall cause
notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given—
(i) to the appellant or his advocate;
(ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf;
(iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon
complaint, to the complainant;
(iv) if the appeal is under section 418 or section 419, to the accused, and shall
also furnish such officer, complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of
appeal.
(2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such record is not
already available in that Court, and hear the parties:
Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the
Court may dispose of the appeal without sending for the record.
(3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the
sentence, the appellant shall not, except with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in
support of any other ground.
427. After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his advocate, if he
appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 418
or section 419, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there
is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the appeal, or may—
(a) in an appeal from an order of acquittal, reverse such order and direct that
further inquiry be made, or that the accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the
case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him according to law;
(b) in an appeal from a conviction—
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused,
or order him to be re-tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to
such Appellate Court or committed for trial; or
(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence; or
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or
the nature and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same;
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence—
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused
or order him to be re-tried by a Court competent to try the offence; or
(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence; or
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or,
the nature and extent, of the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same;
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order;
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be
just or proper:
Procedure for
hearing
appeals not
dismissed
summarily.
Powers of
Appellate
Court.

Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an
opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement:
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the
offence which in its opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for
that offence by the Court passing the order or sentence under appeal.
428. The rules contained in Chapter XXIX as to the judgment of a Criminal Court of
original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a
Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate:
Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be
brought up, or required to attend, to hear judgment delivered.
429. (1) Whenever a case is decided on appeal by the High Court under this Chapter,
it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, sentence or order
appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate
other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent
through the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate,
the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the District Magistrate.
(2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon
make such orders as are conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if
necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith.
430. (1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or order
appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail,
or on his own bond or bail bond:
Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on his own bond or bail
bond a convicted person who is convicted of an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, shall give
opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release:
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be
open to the Public Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail.
(2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may be exercised also
by the High Court in the case of an appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate
thereto.
(3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he
intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,—
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years; or
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable
one, and he is on bail,
order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for
refusing bail, for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain
the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1); and the sentence of imprisonment
shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended.
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to
imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing
the term for which he is so sentenced.
431. When an appeal is presented under section 419, the High Court may issue a
warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any subordinate
Court, and the Court before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the
disposal of the appeal or admit him to bail.
Judgments of
subordinate
Appellate
Court.
Order of High
Court on
appeal to be
certified to
lower Court.
Suspension of
sentence
pending
appeal; release
of appellant
on bail.
Arrest of
accused in
appeal from
acquittal.

432. (1) In dealing with any appeal under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks
additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and may either take such
evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate or, when the Appellate Court is a High
Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate,
it or he shall certify such evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon
proceed to dispose of the appeal.
(3) The accused or his advocate shall have the right to be present when the additional
evidence is taken.
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter XXV, as if it were an inquiry.
433. When an appeal under this Chapter is heard by a High Court before a Bench of
Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with their opinions, shall be laid before
another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver
his opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion:
Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or, where the appeal is laid
before another Judge under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be
re-heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges.
434. Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court upon an appeal shall be
final, except in the cases provided for in section 418, section 419, sub-section (4) of
section 425 or Chapter XXXII:
Provided that notwithstanding the final disposal of an appeal against conviction in
any case, the Appellate Court may hear and dispose of, on the merits,—
(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 419, arising out of the same
case; or
(b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section 418, arising out of
the same case.
435. (1) Every appeal under section 418 or section 419 shall finally abate on the death
of the accused.
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine)
shall finally abate on the death of the appellant:
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of
imprisonment, and the appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near
relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court
for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not abate.
Explanation.—In this section, "near relative" means a parent, spouse, lineal
descendant, brother or sister.
CHAPTER XXXII
REFERENCE AND REVISION
436. (1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question
as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an
Act, Ordinance or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of
the case, and is of opinion that such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or
inoperative, but has not been so declared by the High Court to which that Court is subordinate
or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the reasons
therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court.
Appellate
Court may
take further
evidence or
direct it to be
taken.
Procedure
where Judges
of Court of
appeal are
equally
divided.
Finality of
judgments and
orders on
appeal.
Abatement of
appeals.
Reference to
High Court.

Explanation.—In this section, "Regulation" means any Regulation as defined in the
General Clauses Act, 1897, or in the General Clauses Act of a State.
(2) A Court of Session may, if it thinks fit in any case pending before it to which the
provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High Court any
question of law arising in the hearing of such case.
(3) Any Court making a reference to the High Court under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) may, pending the decision of the High Court thereon, either commit the
accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called upon.
437. (1) When a question has been so referred, the High Court shall pass such order
thereon as it thinks fit, and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court by which
the reference was made, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order.
(2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid.
438. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of
any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction
for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of
any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any
proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when calling, for such record, direct that the
execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in confinement that
he be released on his own bond or bail bond pending the examination of the record.
Explanation.—All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising
original or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the
purposes of this sub-section and of section 439.
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in
relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
(3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the
High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be
entertained by the other of them.
439. On examining any record under section 438 or otherwise, the High Court or the
Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the
Magistrates subordinate to him to make, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate may himself
make or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further inquiry into any complaint
which has been dismissed under section 226 or sub-section (4) of section 227, or into the
case of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged:
Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry into the
case of any person who has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of
showing cause why such direction should not be made.
440. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by
himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by
the High Court under sub-section (1) of section 442.
(2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge
under sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 442
shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and references in the said sub-sections to
the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge.
(3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before
the Sessions Judge, the decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person
shall be final and no further proceeding by way of revision at the instance of such person
shall be entertained by the High Court or any other Court.
441. An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the powers of a
Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him
by or under any general or special order of the Sessions Judge.
Disposal of
case according
to decision of
High Court.
Calling for
records to
exercise
powers of
revision.
Power to
order inquiry.
Sessions
Judge's powers
of revision.
Power of
Additional
Sessions Judge.
10 of 1897.

442. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself
or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise
any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 427, 430, 431 and 432 or on a
Court of Session by section 344, and, when the Judges composing the Court of revision are
equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by
section 433.
(2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other
person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by advocate in
his own defence.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a
finding of acquittal into one of conviction.
(4) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding
by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have
appealed.
(5) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies but an application for revision has been
made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application
was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in
the interests of justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for revision as a
petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.
443. (1) Whenever one or more persons convicted at the same trial makes or make
application to a High Court for revision and any other person convicted at the same trial
makes an application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide,
having regard to the general convenience of the parties and the importance of the questions
involved, which of the two Courts should finally dispose of the applications for revision
and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision should be disposed
of by itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision pending before the
Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not
necessary for it to dispose of the applications for revision, it shall direct that the applications
for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge.
(2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court
shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before itself.
(3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that
Judge shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before himself.
(4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court to the Sessions
Judge, no further application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at
the instance of the person or persons whose applications for revision have been disposed
of by the Sessions Judge.
444. Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, no party has any right to
be heard either personally or by an advocate before any Court exercising its powers of
revision; but the Court may, if it thinks fit, when exercising such powers, hear any party
either personally or by an advocate.
445. When a case is revised under this Chapter by the High Court or a Sessions
Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 429, certify its decision or order to
the Court by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the
Court to which the decision or order is so certified shall thereupon make such orders as are
conformable to the decision so certified, and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in
accordance therewith.
High Court's
powers of
revision.
Power of High
Court to
withdraw or
transfer
revision cases.
Option of
Court to hear
parties.
High Court's
order to be
certified to
lower Court.

CHAPTER XXXIII
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES
446. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this
section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case or appeal be
transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate
to one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to
another High Court.
(2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the
Attorney-General of India or of a party interested, and every such application shall be made
by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the
Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.
(3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is
dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or
vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has
opposed the application such sum as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances of
the case.
447. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High Court—
(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court
subordinate thereto; or
(b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise; or
(c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Sanhita,
or will tend to the general convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for
the ends of justice,
it may order—
(i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under
sections 197 to 205 (both inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or
try such offence;
(ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred
from a Criminal Court subordinate to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of
equal or superior jurisdiction;
(iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or
(iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself.
(2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application
of a party interested, or on its own initiative:
Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for transferring a case from
one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in the same sessions division, unless an
application for such transfer has been made to the Sessions Judge and rejected by him.
(3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1) shall be made by motion,
which shall, except when the applicant is the Advocate-General of the State, be supported
by affidavit or affirmation.
(4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct
him to execute a bond or bail bond for the payment of any compensation which the High
Court may award under sub-section (7).
(5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor
notice in writing of the application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made;
and no order shall be made on the merits of the application unless at least twenty-four hours
have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of the application.
Power of
Supreme Court
to transfer
cases and
appeals.
Power of High
Court to
transfer cases
and appeals.

(6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any subordinate
Court, the High Court may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of
justice, order that, pending the disposal of the application the proceedings in the subordinate
Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court may think fit to impose:
Provided that such stay shall not affect the subordinate Court's power of remand
under section 346.
(7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1) is dismissed, the High
Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the
applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application
such sum as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case.
(8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that a case be transferred from
any Court for trial before itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that
Court would have observed if the case had not been so transferred.
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any order of the Government
under section 218.
448. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to a Sessions Judge that an order under this
sub-section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order that any particular case be
transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division.
(2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the
application of a party interested, or on his own initiative.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 447 shall
apply in relation to an application to the Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1)
as they apply in relation to an application to the High Court for an order under
sub-section (1) of section 447, except that sub-section (7) of that section shall so apply as
if for the word "sum" occurring therein, the words "sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees"
were substituted.
449. (1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or appeal from, or recall any case or
appeal which he has made over to a Chief Judicial Magistrate subordinate to him.
(2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced
before the Additional Sessions Judge, a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal
which he has made over to any Additional Sessions Judge.
(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), he may either try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or
make it over in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita to another Court for trial or
hearing, as the case may be.
450. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case from, or recall any case
which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try
such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to
inquire into or try the same.
(2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under
sub-section (2) of section 212 to any other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such
cases himself.
451. Any District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may—
(a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him,
to any Magistrate subordinate to him;
(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any
Magistrate subordinate to him, and dispose of such proceeding himself or refer it for
disposal to any other Magistrate.
Power of
Sessions Judge
to transfer
cases and
appeals.
Withdrawal of
cases and
appeals by
Sessions
Judges.
Withdrawal of
cases by
Judicial
Magistrates.
Making over
or withdrawal
of cases by
Executive
Magistrates.

452. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 448, section 449,
section 450 or section 451 shall record his reasons for making it.
CHAPTER XXXIV
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES
A.—Death sentences
453. When in a case submitted to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of
death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or other order of the High
Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or
taking such other steps as may be necessary.
454. When a sentence of death is passed by the High Court in appeal or in revision,
the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the sentence to
be carried into effect by issuing a warrant.
455. (1) Where a person is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from
its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1)
of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to
be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an appeal
is preferred within that period, until such appeal is disposed of.
(2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the
person sentenced makes an application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under
article 132 or under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High
Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until such application is
disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the
period allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired.
(3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the High
Court is satisfied that the person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme
Court for the grant of special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution, the High
Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed for such period as it
considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition.
456. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall
commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.
B.—Imprisonment
457. (1) Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, the
State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be imprisoned or committed
to custody under this Sanhita shall be confined.
(2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Sanhita
is in confinement in a civil jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal
may direct that the person be removed to a criminal jail.
(3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub-section (2), he shall, on
being released therefrom, be sent back to the civil jail, unless either—
(a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the criminal jail, in which
case he shall be deemed to have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; or
(b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the
officer in charge of the criminal jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Reasons to be
recorded.
Execution of
order passed
under section
409.
Execution of
sentence of
death passed
by High Court.
Postponement
of execution
of sentence of
death in case
of appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Commutation
of sentence of
death on
pregnant
woman.
Power to
appoint place
of
imprisonment.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

458. (1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or to imprisonment
for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 453, the Court passing the
sentence shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be,
confined, and, unless the accused is already confined in such jail or other place, shall
forward him to such jail or other place, with the warrant:
Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the
Court, it shall not be necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may
be confined in such place as the Court may direct.
(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such
imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his
arrest for the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he is to be
confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest.
459. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed
to the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is, or is to be, confined.
460. When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be lodged with the
jailor.
C.—Levy of fine
461. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine, but no such payment
has been made, the Court passing the sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine
in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may—
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any
movable property belonging to the offender;
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the
amount as arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both,
of the defaulter:
Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine, the
offender shall be imprisoned, and if such offender has undergone the whole of such
imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, for special reasons to be
recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless it has made an order for the
payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 395.
(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner in which warrants
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of
any claims made by any person other than the offender in respect of any property attached
in execution of such warrant.
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of
sub-section (1), the Collector shall realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to
recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were a certificate issued under such law:
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the arrest or detention in prison of
the offender.
462. A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 461 by any Court
may be executed within the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the
attachment and sale of any such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by
the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction such property is found.
463. Notwithstanding anything in this Sanhita or in any other law for the time being
in force, when an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine by a Criminal Court in any
territory to which this Sanhita does not extend and the Court passing the sentence issues
a warrant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which this Sanhita extends,
authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant
shall be deemed to be a warrant issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 461 by
Execution of
sentence of
imprisonment.
Direction of
warrant for
execution.
Warrant with
whom to be
lodged.
Warrant for
levy of fine.
Effect of such
warrant.
Warrant for
levy of fine
issued by a
Court in any
territory to
which this
Sanhita does
not extend.

a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends, and the provisions of sub-section (3)
of the said section as to the execution of such warrant shall apply accordingly.
464. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to fine only and to imprisonment in
default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may—
(a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more
than thirty days from the date of the order, or in two or three installments, of which the
first shall be payable on or before a date not more than thirty days from the date of the
order and the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may be, of not
more than thirty days;
(b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the
offender, on the execution by the offender of a bond or bail bond, as the Court thinks
fit, conditioned for his appearance before the Court on the date or dates on or before
which payment of the fine or the installments thereof, as the case may be, is to be
made; and if the amount of the fine or of any installment, as the case may be, is not
realised on or before the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the Court
may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be carried into execution at once.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable also in any case in which an
order for the payment of money has been made on non-recovery of which imprisonment
may be awarded and the money is not paid forthwith; and, if the person against whom the
order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is referred to in that
sub-section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment.
D.—General provisions regarding execution
465. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the Judge
or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor-in-office.
466. (1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life or fine is passed under this
Sanhita on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the provisions hereinbefore
contained, take effect immediately.
(2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Sanhita on an
escaped convict,—
(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict
was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately;
(b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict
was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has
suffered imprisonment for a further period equal to that which, at the time of his
escape, remained unexpired of his former sentence.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be
deemed to be severer in kind than a sentence of simple imprisonment.
467. (1) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment is sentenced
on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such imprisonment or
imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has
been previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall
run concurrently with such previous sentence:
Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order
under section 141 in default of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence,
sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed prior to the making of such order, the
latter sentence shall commence immediately.
(2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced
on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the
subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence.
Suspension of
execution of
sentence of
imprisonment.
Who may
issue warrant.
Sentence on
escaped
convict when
to take effect.
Sentence on
offender
already
sentenced for
another
offence.

468. Where an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment
for a term, not being imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period of detention, if
any, undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case and before
the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed on
him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment on such
conviction shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed
on him:
Provided that in cases referred to in section 475, such period of detention shall be set
off against the period of fourteen years referred to in that section.
469. (1) Nothing in section 466 or section 467 shall be held to excuse any person from
any part of the punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction.
(2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a
substantive sentence of imprisonment and the person undergoing the sentence is after its
execution to undergo a further substantive sentence or further substantive sentences of
imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default of payment
of the fine until the person has undergone the further sentence or sentences.
470. When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer executing it shall return the
warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand certifying
the manner in which the sentence has been executed.
471. Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of any order made under this
Sanhita, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall
be recoverable as if it were a fine:
Provided that section 461 shall, in its application to an order under section 400, by
virtue of this section, be construed as if in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 461,
after the words and figures "under section 395", the words and figures "or an order for
payment of costs under section 400" had been inserted.
E.—Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences
472. (1) A convict under the sentence of death or his legal heir or any other relative
may, if he has not already submitted a petition for mercy, file a mercy petition before the
President of India under article 72 or the Governor of the State under article 161 of the
Constitution within a period of thirty days from the date on which the Superintendent of the
jail,—
(i) informs him about the dismissal of the appeal, review or special leave to
appeal by the Supreme Court; or
(ii) informs him about the date of confirmation of the sentence of death by the
High Court and the time allowed to file an appeal or special leave in the Supreme Court
has expired.
(2) The petition under sub-section (1) may, initially be made to the Governor and on
its rejection or disposal by the Governor, the petition shall be made to the President within
a period of sixty days from the date of rejection or disposal of such petition.
(3) The Superintendent of the jail or officer in charge of the jail shall ensure, that
every convict, in case there are more than one convict in a case, also files the mercy petition
within a period of sixty days and on non-receipt of such petition from the other convicts,
Superintendent of the jail shall send the names, addresses, copy of the record of the case
and all other details of the case to the Central Government or the State Government for
consideration along with the said mercy petition.
(4) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the mercy petition seek the comments
of the State Government and consider the petition along with the records of the case and
Period of
detention
undergone by
accused to be
set off against
sentence
of
imprisonment.
Return of
warrant on
execution of
sentence.
Money
ordered to be
paid
recoverable as
a fine.
Mercy
petition in
death sentence
cases.
Saving.

make recommendations to the President in this behalf, as expeditiously as possible, within
a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of comments of the State Government and
records from Superintendent of the Jail.
(5) The President may, consider, decide and dispose of the mercy petition and, in case
there are more than one convict in a case, the petitions shall be decided by the President
together in the interests of justice.
(6) Upon receipt of the order of the President on the mercy petition, the Central
Government shall within forty-eight hours, communicate the same to the Home Department
of the State Government and the Superintendent of the jail or officer in charge of the jail.
(7) No appeal shall lie in any Court against the order of the President or of the
Governor made under article 72 or article 161 of the Constitution and it shall be final, and any
question as to the arriving of the decision by the President or the Governor shall not be
inquired into in any Court.
473. (1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an offence, the
appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which
the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or
any part of the punishment to which he has been sentenced.
(2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension
or remission of a sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of
the Court before or by which the conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to
whether the application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons for such
opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of the
record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists.
(3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the
opinion of the appropriate Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel
the suspension or remission, and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has
been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police officer, without
warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence.
(4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section
may be one to be fulfilled by the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or
remitted, or one independent of his will.
(5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions
as to the suspension of sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented
and dealt with:
Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a
person above the age of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by
any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, unless the person sentenced is in jail,
and—
(a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through
the officer in charge of the jail; or
(b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration
that the person sentenced is in jail.
(6) The provisions of the above sub-sections shall also apply to any order passed by
a Criminal Court under any section of this Sanhita or of any other law, which restricts the
liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him or his property.
(7) In this section and in section 474, the expression "appropriate Government"
means,—
(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to
in sub-section (6) is passed under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive
power of the Union extends, the Central Government;
Power to
suspend or
remit
sentences.

(b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is
sentenced or the said order is passed.
474. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person sentenced,
commute—
(a) a sentence of death, for imprisonment for life;
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not less than
seven years;
(c) a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more, for imprisonment for a
term not less than three years;
(d) a sentence of imprisonment for less than seven years, for fine;
(e) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term
to which that person might have been sentenced.
475. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 473, where a sentence of
imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an offence for which death is
one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person
has been commuted under section 474 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall
not be released from prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.
476. The powers conferred by sections 473 and 474 upon the State Government may,
in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised by the Central Government.
477. (1) The powers conferred by sections 473 and 474 upon the State Government to
remit or commute a sentence, in any case where the sentence is for an offence—
(a) which was investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation
into an offence under any Central Act other than this Sanhita; or
(b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any
property belonging to the Central Government; or
(c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government
while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
shall not be exercised by the State Government except after concurrence with the Central
Government.
(2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State
Government in relation to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to
matters to which the executive power of the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to
separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, shall have effect unless an order
for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such sentences has also
been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person
with regard to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends.
CHAPTER XXXV
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS
478. (1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is
arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears
Power to
commute
sentence.
Restriction on
powers of
remission or
commutation
in certain
cases.
Concurrent
power of
Central
Government
in case of
death
sentences.
State
Government
to act after
concurrence
with Central
Government
in certain
cases.
In what cases
bail to be
taken.

or is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer
or at any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be
released on bail:
Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, and shall, if such person
is indigent and is unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail bond from such person,
discharge him on his executing a bond for his appearance as hereinafter provided.
Explanation.—Where a person is unable to give bail bond within a week of the date
of his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is
an indigent person for the purposes of this proviso:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions
of sub-section (3) of section 135 or section 492.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where a person has failed to comply
with the conditions of the bond or bail bond as regards the time and place of attendance, the
Court may refuse to release him on bail, when on a subsequent occasion in the same case he
appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such refusal shall be without
prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond or bail
bond to pay the penalty thereof under section 491.
479. (1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under
this Sanhita of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of
death or life imprisonment has been specified as one of the punishments under that law)
undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of
imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on
bail:
Provided that where such person is a first-time offender (who has never been convicted
of any offence in the past) he shall be released on bond by the Court, if he has undergone
detention for the period extending up to one-third of the maximum period of imprisonment
specified for such offence under that law:
Provided further that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such person for a
period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on bail bond instead of his
bond:
Provided also that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of
investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonment provided
for the said offence under that law.
Explanation.—In computing the period of detention under this section for granting
bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall
be excluded.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), and subject to the third proviso
thereof, where an investigation, inquiry or trial in more than one offence or in multiple cases
are pending against a person, he shall not be released on bail by the Court.
(3) The Superintendent of jail, where the accused person is detained, on completion
of one-half or one-third of the period mentioned in sub-section (1), as the case may be, shall
forthwith make an application in writing to the Court to proceed under sub-section (1) for
the release of such person on bail.
480. (1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any
non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a
police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of
Session, he may be released on bail, but—
(i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for
Maximum
period for
which
undertrial
prisoner can
be detained.
When bail
may be taken
in case of
non-bailable
offence.

believing that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life;
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence
and he had been previously convicted of an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, or he had been
previously convicted on two or more occasions of a cognizable offence punishable
with imprisonment for three years or more but less than seven years:
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii)
be released on bail if such person is a child or is a woman or is sick or infirm:
Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii)
be released on bail if it is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other special
reason:
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for being
identified by witnesses during investigation or for police custody beyond the first fifteen
days shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be
released on bail and gives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directions as may
be given by the Court:
Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by
him is punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or
more, be released on bail by the Court under this sub-section without giving an opportunity
of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.
the execution by him of a bond for his appearance as hereinafter provided.
(3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under
Chapter VI, Chapter VII or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or abetment
of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail under
sub-section (1), the Court shall impose the conditions,—
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond
executed under this Chapter;
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which
he is accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected; and
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat
or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence,
and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers
necessary.
(4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its reasons or special reasons for so doing.
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct that such person be
arrested and commit him to custody.
(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or
trial, as the case may be, that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the
accused has committed a non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for
further inquiry into his guilt, the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 492 and
pending such inquiry, be released on bail, or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, o
n

(6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any
non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed
for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during the whole of the
said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons to
be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.
(7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a
non-bailable offence and before judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of any such offence, it shall
release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond for his appearance
to hear judgment delivered.
481. (1) Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal, the Court
trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall require the accused to
execute a bond or bail bond, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court
issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective
Court and such bond shall be in force for six months.
(2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under
section 491 shall apply.
482. (1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an
accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or
the Court of Session for a direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit,
direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under
sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of
the particular case, as it may think fit, including—
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by
a police officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the Court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of
section 480, as if the bail were granted under that section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a
police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time
while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a
Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in
the first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the
direction of the Court under sub-section (1).
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person
on accusation of having committed an offence under section 65 and sub-section (2) of
section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
483. (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct,—
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail,
and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 480, may
impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in
that sub-section;
Bail to require
accused to
appear before
next Appellate
Court.
Direction for
grant of bail
to person
apprehending
arrest.
Special powers
of High Court
or Court of
Session
regarding bail.

(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on
bail be set aside or modified:
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a
person who is accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or
which, though not so triable, is punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice of the
application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice:
Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting
bail to a person who is accused of an offence triable under section 65 or sub-section (2) of
section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, give notice of the application for bail to the
Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of
such application.
(2) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory
at the time of hearing of the application for bail to the person under section 65 or
sub-section (2) of section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(3) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been
released on bail under this Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody.
484. (1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapter shall be fixed with
due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive.
(2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a police
officer or Magistrate be reduced.
485. (1) Before any person is released on bond or bail bond, a bond for such sum of
money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall be executed
by such person, and, when he is released on bond or bail bond, by one or more sufficient
sureties conditioned that such person shall attend at the time and place mentioned in the
bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the police officer or Court,
as the case may be.
(2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person on bail, the bond or
bail bond shall also contain that condition.
(3) If the case so requires, the bond or bail bond shall also bind the person released
on bail to appear when called upon at the High Court, Court of Session or other Court to
answer the charge.
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court
may accept affidavits in proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency or
fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, may either hold an enquiry itself or cause
an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such sufficiency or
fitness.
486. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail, shall
make a declaration before the Court as to the number of persons to whom he has stood
surety including the accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars.
487. (1) As soon as the bond or bail bond has been executed, the person for whose
appearance it has been executed shall be released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting
him to bail shall issue an order of release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer
on receipt of the orders shall release him.
(2) Nothing in this section, section 478 or section 480, shall be deemed to require the
release of any person liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of
which the bond or bail bond was executed.
Amount of
bond and
reduction
thereof.
Bond of
accused and
sureties.
Declaration by
sureties.
Discharge
from custody.

488. If, through mistake, fraud or otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted,
or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a warrant of arrest directing
that the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient
sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him to jail.
489. (1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on
bail may at any time apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as
relates to the applicants.
(2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest
directing that the person so released be brought before him.
(3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary
surrender, the Magistrate shall direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as
relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to find other sufficient sureties,
and, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail.
490. When any person is required by any Court or officer to execute a bond or bail
bond, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour, permit him
to deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or
officer may fix in lieu of executing such bond.
491. (1) Where,—
(a) a bond under this Sanhita is for appearance, or for production of property,
before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to
which the case has subsequently been transferred, that the bond has been forfeited; or
(b) in respect of any other bond under this Sanhita, it is proved to the satisfaction
of the Court by which the bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has
subsequently been transferred, or of the Court of any Magistrate of the first class,
that the bond has been forfeited,
the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by
such bond to pay the penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid.
Explanation.—A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property,
before a Court shall be construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case
may be, for production of property, before any Court to which the case may subsequently
be transferred.
(2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court may proceed
to recover the same as if such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Sanhita:
Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the manner
aforesaid, the person so bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Court ordering the
recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil jail for a term which may extend to six
months.
(3) The Court may, after recording its reasons for doing so, remit any portion of the
penalty mentioned and enforce payment in part only.
(4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be
discharged from all liability in respect of the bond.
(5) Where any person who has furnished security under section 125 or section 136 or
section 401 is convicted of an offence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the
conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in lieu of his bond under section 494, a
certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such offence may
be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and,
if such certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed
by him unless the contrary is proved.
Power to
order
sufficient bail
when that first
taken is
insufficient.
Discharge of
sureties.
Deposit
instead of
recognizance.
Procedure
when bond has
been forfeited.

492. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 491, where a bond or bail bond
under this Sanhita is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a
condition,—
(a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by
one or more of his sureties in that case shall stand cancelled; and
(b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that
case, if the police officer or the Court, as the case may be, for appearance before
whom the bond was executed, is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for the
failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition:
Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Sanhita he may be released in
that case upon the execution of a fresh personal bond for such sum of money and bond by
one or more of such sureties as the police officer or the Court, as the case may be, thinks
sufficient.
493. When any surety to a bail bond under this Sanhita becomes insolvent or dies,
or when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of section 491, the Court by whose order
such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom
such security was demanded to furnish fresh security in accordance with the directions of
the original order, and if such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may
proceed as if there had been a default in complying with such original order.
494. When the person required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a child,
such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties
only.
495. All orders passed under section 491 shall be appealable,—
(i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge;
(ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an
appeal lies from an order made by such Court.
496. The High Court or Court of Session may direct any Magistrate to levy the
amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or Court of Session.
CHAPTER XXXVI
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY
497. (1) When any property is produced before any Criminal Court or the Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance or commit the case for trial during any investigation, inquiry
or trial, the Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper
custody of such property pending the conclusion of the investigation, inquiry or trial, and,
if the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do,
the Court or the Magistrate may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order
it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "property" includes—
(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the Court or
which is in its custody;
(b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed
or which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence.
(2) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of fourteen days from the
production of the property referred to in sub-section (1) before it, prepare a statement of
such property containing its description in such form and manner as the State Government
may, by rules, provide.
(3) The Court or the Magistrate shall cause to be taken the photograph and if necessary,
Cancellation
of bond and
bail bond.
Procedure in
case of
insolvency or
death of
surety or when
a bond is
forfeited.
Bond required
from child.
Appeal from
orders under
section 491.
Power to
direct levy of
amount due on
certain
recognizances.
Order for
custody and
disposal of
property
pending trial
in certain
cases.

videograph on mobile phone or any electronic media, of the property referred to in
sub-section (1).
(4) The statement prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the
videography taken under sub-section (3) shall be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under the Sanhita.
(5) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of thirty days after the statement
has been prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the videography has been
taken under sub-section (3), order the disposal, destruction, confiscation or delivery of the
property in the manner specified hereinafter.
498. (1) When an investigation, inquiry or trial in any criminal case is concluded, the
Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction,
confiscation or delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or
otherwise, of any property or document produced before it or in its custody, or regarding
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which has been used for the
commission of any offence.
(2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the delivery of any property to
any person claiming to be entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on
condition that he executes a bond, with or without securities, to the satisfaction of the
Court or the Magistrate, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made
under sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision.
(3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order under sub-section (1),
direct the property to be delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon
deal with it in the manner provided in sections 503, 504 and 505.
(4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to speedy and natural decay,
or where a bond has been executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an order made under
sub-section (1) shall not be carried out for two months, or when an appeal is presented,
until such appeal has been disposed of.
(5) In this section, the term "property" includes, in the case of property regarding
which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been
originally in the possession or under the control of any party, but also any property into or
for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such
conversion or exchange, whether immediately or otherwise.
499. When any person is convicted of any offence which includes, or amounts to,
theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that any other person bought the stolen
property from him without knowing or having reason to believe that the same was stolen,
and that any money has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of the convicted
person, the Court may, on the application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the
stolen property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, order that out of such
money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him within six
months from the date of such order.
500. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a Court or Magistrate under
section 498 or section 499, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie
from convictions by the former Court.
(2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order to be stayed pending
disposal of the appeal, or may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders
that may be just.
(3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of
appeal, confirmation or revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in
sub-section (1) was made.
501. (1) On a conviction under section 294, section 295, or sub-sections (3) and (4) of
section 356 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Court may order the destruction of all
the copies of the thing in respect of which the conviction was had, and which are in the
custody of the Court or remain in the possession or power of the person convicted.
Order for
disposal of
property at
conclusion of
trial.
Payment to
innocent
purchaser of
money found
on accused.
Appeal against
orders under
section 498 or
section 499.
Destruction of
libellous and
other matter.

(2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section 274, section 275,
section 276 or section 277 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, order the food, drink, drug
or medical preparation in respect of which the conviction was had, to be destroyed.
502. (1) When a person is convicted of an offence by use of criminal force or show of
force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such use of force or
show of force or intimidation, any person has been dispossessed of any immovable property,
the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that possession of the same be restored to that person
after evicting by force, if necessary, any other person who may be in possession of the
property:
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the
date of the conviction.
(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub-section (1),
the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit, make such order while
disposing of the appeal, reference or revision, as the case may be.
(3) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1), the provisions of
section 500 shall apply in relation thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 499.
(4) No order made under this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such
immovable property which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit.
503. (1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police officer is reported to a
Magistrate under the provisions of this Sanhita, and such property is not produced before
a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks
fit respecting the disposal of such property or the delivery of such property to the person
entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person cannot be ascertained, respecting the
custody and production of such property.
(2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be
delivered to him on such conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person
is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation
specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person who may
have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the
date of such proclamation.
504. (1) If no person within such period establishes his claim to such property, and if
the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to show that it was
legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may by order direct that such property shall be at
the disposal of the State Government and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds
of such sale shall be dealt with in such manner as the State Government may, by rules,
provide.
(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to which appeals ordinarily
lie from convictions by the Magistrate.
505. If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent
and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its
seizure is reported is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the
value of such property is less than ten thousand rupees, the Magistrate may at any time
direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sections 503 and 504 shall, as nearly as may be
practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.
CHAPTER XXXVII
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS
506. If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of the following things,
namely:—
(a) to issue a search-warrant under section 97;
(b) to order, under section 174, the police to investigate an offence;
Power to
restore
possession of
immovable
property.
Procedure by
police upon
seizure of
property.
Procedure
where no
claimant
appears within
six months.
Power to sell
perishable
property.
Irregularities
which do not
vitiate
proceedings.

(c) to hold an inquest under section 196;
(d) to issue process under section 207, for the apprehension of a person within
his local jurisdiction who has committed an offence outside the limits of such
jurisdiction;
(e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 210;
(f) to make over a case under sub-section (2) of section 212;
(g) to tender a pardon under section 343;
(h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 450; or
(i) to sell property under section 504 or section 505,
erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on
the ground of his not being so empowered.
507. If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, does any of the
following things, namely:—
(a) attaches and sells property under section 85;
(b) issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody
of a postal authority;
(c) demands security to keep the peace;
(d) demands security for good behaviour;
(e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour;
(f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;
(g) makes an order for maintenance;
(h) makes an order under section 152 as to a local nuisance;
(i) prohibits, under section 162, the repetition or continuance of a public
nuisance;
(j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter XI;
(k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 210;
(l) tries an offender;
(m) tries an offender summarily;
(n) passes a sentence, under section 364, on proceedings recorded by another
Magistrate;
(o) decides an appeal;
(p) calls, under section 438, for proceedings; or
(q) revises an order passed under section 491,
his proceedings shall be void.
508. No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside merely on
the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived
at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub-division or other local
area, unless it appears that such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice.
Irregularities
which vitiate
proceedings.
Proceedings in
wrong place.

509. (1) If any Court before which a confession or other statement of an accused
person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 183 or section 316, is tendered,
or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections
have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may,
notwithstanding anything contained in section 94 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam,
2023, take evidence in regard to such non-compliance, and may, if satisfied that such
non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly
made the statement recorded, admit such statement.
(2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.
510. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be
deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any
error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in
the opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact
been occasioned thereby.
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure of
justice has in fact been occasioned, it may,—
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed,
and that the trial be recommenced from the point immediately after the framing of the
charge;
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial
to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid
charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash
the conviction.
511. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or
order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court of
appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the
complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or
during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Sanhita, or any error, or
irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure
of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under
this Sanhita, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned
a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and
should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.
512. No attachment made under this Sanhita shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall any
person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any defect or want of form
in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES
513. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "period
of limitation" means the period specified in section 514 for taking cognizance of an offence.
514. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Sanhita, no Court shall take cognizance
of an offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the expiry of the period of
limitation.
(2) The period of limitation shall be—
(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;
(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year;
Noncompliance
with provisions
of section 183
or section 316.
Effect of
omission to
frame, or
absence of, or
error in,
charge.
Finding or
sentence when
reversible by
reason of
error,
omission or
irregularity.
Defect or
error not to
make
attachment
unlawful.
Definitions.
Bar to taking
cognizance
after lapse of
period of
limitation.

(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year but not exceeding three years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences
which may be tried together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is
punishable with the more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe
punishment.
Explanation.—For the purpose of computing the period of limitation, the relevant
date shall be the date of filing complaint under section 223 or the date of recording of
information under section 173.
515. (1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, shall commence,—
(a) on the date of the offence; or
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved
by the offence or to any police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to
the knowledge of such person or to any police officer, whichever is earlier; or
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on
which the identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or
to the police officer making investigation into the offence, whichever is earlier.
(2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed
shall be excluded.
516. (1) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which any person has
been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first instance
or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be excluded:
Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the
same facts and is prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or
other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it.
(2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed
by an injunction or order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the
continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day
on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.
(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any
law for the time being in force, the previous consent or sanction of the Government or any
other authority is required for the institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in
computing the period of limitation, the period of such notice or, as the case may be, the time
required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded.
Explanation.—In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction
of the Government or any other authority, the date on which the application was made for
obtaining the consent or sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or
other authority shall both be excluded.
(4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which the offender—
(a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is
under the administration of the Central Government; or
(b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,
shall be excluded.
517. Where the period of limitation expires on a day when the Court is closed, the
Court may take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens.
Explanation.—A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning
of this section, if, during its normal working hours, it remains closed on that day.
Commencement
of period of
limitation.
Exclusion of
time in
certain cases.
Exclusion of
date on which
Court is closed.

518. In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run
at every moment of the time during which the offence continues.
519. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if it
is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been
properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice.
CHAPTER XXXIX
MISCELLANEOUS
520. When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 447, it
shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would
observe if it were trying the case.
521. (1) The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Sanhita and the
Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957, and any other law, relating to
the Armed Forces of the Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons
subject to army, naval or air-force law, or such other law, shall be tried by a Court to which
this Sanhita applies, or by a Court-martial; and when any person is brought before a Magistrate
and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which this
Sanhita applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and
shall in proper cases deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of which he is
accused, to the commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding
officer of the nearest army, naval or air-force station, as the case may be, for the purpose of
being tried by a Court-martial.
Explanation.—In this section—
(a) "unit" includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or
company;
(b) "Court-martial" includes any Tribunal with the powers similar to those of a
Court-martial constituted under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of
the Union.
(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the
commanding officer of any unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed
at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to apprehend and secure any person accused
of such offence.
(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate
within the State be brought before a Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any
matter pending before the Court-martial.
522. Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set
forth in the Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case
require, may be used for the respective purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be
sufficient.
523. (1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government,
make rules—
(a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition-writers in the
Criminal Courts subordinate to it;
(b) regulating the issue of licences to such persons, the conduct of business by
them, and the scale of fees to be charged by them;
(c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and
determining the authority by which such contravention may be investigated and the
penalties imposed;
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules made
by the State Government.
Continuing
offence.
Extension of
period of
limitation in
certain cases.
Trials before
High Courts.
Delivery to
commanding
officers of
persons liable
to be tried by
Court-martial.
Forms.
Power of High
Court to make
rules.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.

(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
524. If the Legislative Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State
Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, direct that references
in sections 127, 128, 129, 164 and 166 to an Executive Magistrate shall be construed as
references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
525. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with the permission of the Court to which
an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he is a party, or
personally interested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment
or order passed or made by himself.
Explanation.—A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or
personally interested in, any case by reason only that he is concerned therein in a public
capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in which an offence is alleged to
have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to the case
is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case.
526. No advocate who practices in the Court of any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate
in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court.
527. A public servant having any duty to perform in connection with the sale of any
property under this Sanhita shall not purchase or bid for the property.
528. Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of
the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under
this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice.
529. Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Session
and Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to ensure that there is an expeditious
and proper disposal of cases by the Judges and Magistrates.
530. All trials, inquires and proceedings under this Sanhita, including—
(i) issuance, service and execution of summons and warrant;
(ii) examination of complainant and witnesses;
(iii) recording of evidence in inquiries and trials; and
(iv) all appellate proceedings or any other proceeding,
may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of audio-video
electronic means.
531. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal—
(a) if, immediately before the date on which this Sanhita comes into force, there
is any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal,
application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be disposed of, continued, held or
made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Power to alter
functions
allocated to
Executive
Magistrate in
certain cases.
Cases in which
Judge or
Magistrate is
personally
interested.
Practising
advocate not
to sit as
Magistrate in
certain Courts.
Public servant
concerned in
sale not to
purchase or
bid for
property.
Saving of
inherent
powers of
High Court.
Duty of High
Court to
exercise
continuous
superintendence
over Courts.
Trial and
proceedings to
be held in
electronic
mode.
Repeal and
savings.
2 of 1974.

Procedure, 1973, as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter
referred to as the said Code), as if this Sanhita had not come into force;
(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms
provided by rules, local jurisdictions defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and
appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, made under the said
Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Sanhita,
shall be deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, specified,
defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita;
(c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the said Code in pursuance
of which no proceeding was commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have
been accorded or given under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita and
proceedings may be commenced under this Sanhita in pursuance of such sanction or
consent.
(3) Where the period specified for an application or other proceeding under the said
Code had expired on or before the commencement of this Sanhita, nothing in this Sanhita
shall be construed as enabling any such application to be made or proceeding to be
commenced under this Sanhita by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is
specified by this Sanhita or provisions are made in this Sanhita for the extension of time.
2 of 1974.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
EXPLANATORY NOTES:
(1) In regard to offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, the entries in the second and
third columns against a section the number of which is given in the first column are not
intended as the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, but merely as indication of the substance of the section.
(2) In this Schedule, (i) the expression "Magistrate of the first class" and "any Magistrate"
does not include Executive Magistrates; (ii) the word "cognizable" stands for "a police officer
may arrest without warrant"; and (iii) the word "non-cognizable" stands for "a police officer
shall not arrest without warrant".
I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA
Section
Offence
Punishment
Cognizable or NonBailable or NonBy what Court
cognizable
bailable
triable
Abetment of any offence,
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
if the act abetted is
abetted.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
committed in consequence,
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
and where no express
provision is made for its
punishment.
Abetment of any offence,
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
if the person abetted does
abetted.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
act with different intention
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
from that of abettor.
Abetment of any offence,
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
when one act is abetted and intended to be abetted.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
a different act is done;
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
subject to the proviso.
Abettor when liable to
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
cumulative punishment
abetted.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
for act abetted and for
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
act done.
Abetment of any offence,
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
when an effect is caused by committed.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
the act abetted different
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
from that intended by the
abettor.
Abetment of any offence,
Same as for offence
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
if abettor present when
committed.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
offence is committed.
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
Abetment of an offence,
Imprisonment for 7 years According as offence
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
punishable with death or
and fine.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
imprisonment for life,
or non-cognizable.
if the offence be not
committed in consequence
of the abetment.
If an act which causes harm Imprisonment for 14 years According as offence
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
to be done in consequence
and fine.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
of the abetment.
or non-cognizable.
Abetment of an offence,
Imprisonment extending
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
punishable with imprisonment, to one-fourth of the
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
if the offence be not
longest term provided for or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
committed in consequence
the offence, or fine,
of the abetment.
or both.

If the abettor or the person Imprisonment extending
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
abetted be a public servant
to one-half of the longest abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
whose duty it is to prevent
term provided for the
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
the offence.
offence, or fine, or both.
Abetting commission of an Imprisonment which may According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
offence by the public or by extend to 7 years and
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
more than ten persons.
fine.
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
58 (a)
Concealing design to
Imprisonment for 7 years According as offence
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
commit offence punishable and fine.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
with death or imprisonment
or non-cognizable.
for life, if the offence be
committed.
58(b)
If offence be not committed. Imprisonment for 3 years According as offence
Bailable.
Court by which offence
and fine.
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
or non-cognizable.
59(a)
A public servant concealing Imprisonment extending
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
a design to commit an
to one-half of the longest abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
offence which it is his duty term provided for the
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
to prevent, if the offence
offence, or fine, or both.
be committed.
59(b)
If the offence be punishable Imprisonment for 10 years. According as offence
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
with death or imprisonment
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
for life.
or non-cognizable.
59(c)
If the offence be not
Imprisonment extending
According as offence
Bailable.
Court by which offence
committed.
to one-fourth of the
abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
longest term provided
or non-cognizable.
for the offence, or fine,
or both.
60(a)
Concealing a design to
Imprisonment extending
According as offence
According as offence
Court by which offence
commit an offence
to one-fourth of the
abetted is cognizable
abetted is bailable or
abetted is triable.
punishable with
longest term provided
or non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
imprisonment, if offence
for the offence, or fine,
be committed.
or both.
60(b)
If the offence be not
Imprisonment extending
According as offence
Bailable.
Court by which offence
committed.
to one-eighth part of the abetted is cognizable
abetted is triable.
longest term provided for or non-cognizable.
the offence, or fine,
or both.
61(2)(a) Criminal conspiracy to
Same as for abetment of
According as the offence According as offence
Court by which abetment
commit an offence
the offence which is the
which is the object of
which is object of
of the offence which is
punishable with death,
object of the conspiracy.
conspiracy is cognizable conspiracy is bailable
the object of conspiracy
imprisonment for life or
or non-cognizable.
or non-bailable.
is triable.
rigorous imprisonment for
a term of 2 years or
upwards.
61(2)(b) Any other criminal
Imprisonment for 6
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
conspiracy.
months, or fine, or both.
class.
Attempting to commit
One half of the imprison- According as the
According as the
The court by which the
offence punishable with
ment for life, or imprison- offence is cognizable
offence attempted by
offence attempted is
imprisonment for life,
ment not exceeding oneor non-cognizable.
the offender is bailable triable.
or imprisonment, and in
half of the longest term,
or non-bailable.
such attempt doing any act provided for the offence,
towards the commission of or fine, or both.
the offence.
64(1)
Rape.
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
for not less than 10 years
but which may extend to
imprisonment for life,
and fine.

64(2)
Rape by a police officer or
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
a public servant or member for not less than 10 years
of armed forces or a person but which may extend to
being on the management
imprisonment for life
or on the staff of a jail,
which shall mean the
remand home or other
remainder of that person's
place of custody or
natural life and fine.
women's or children's
institution or by a person
on the management or on
the staff of a hospital, and
rape committed by a person
in a position of trust or
authority towards the person
raped or by a near relative
of the person raped.
65(1)
Persons committing offence Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of rape on a woman under
not less than 20 years but
sixteen years of age.
which may extend to
imprisonment for life,
which shall mean
imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's
natural life and fine.
65(2)
Persons committing offence
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of rape on a woman under
for not less than 20 years
twelve years of age.
but which may extend to
imprisonment for life
which shall mean
imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's
natural life and with
fine or death.
Person committing an
Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
offence of rape and
not less than 20 years but
inflicting injury which
which may extend to
causes death or causes
imprisonment for life
the woman to be in a
which shall mean
persistent vegetative state. imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's
natural life or death.
Sexual intercourse by
Imprisonment for not
Cognizable (only
Bailable.
Court of Session.
husband upon his wife
less than 2 years but
on the complaint
during separation.
which may extend to
of the victim).
7 years and fine.
Sexual intercourse by a
Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
person in authority, etc.
not less than 5 years,
but which may extend to
10 years and fine.
Sexual intercourse by
Imprisonment which may
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
employing deceitful
extend to 10 years and
means, etc.
fine.
70(1)
Gang rape.
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
for not less than 20 years
but which may extend to
imprisonment for life
which shall mean
imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's
natural life and fine.

70(2)
Gang rape on a woman
Imprisonment for life which
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
under eighteen years of age.
shall mean imprisonment
for the remainder of that
person's natural life and
with fine or with death.
Repeat offenders.
Imprisonment for life
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
which shall mean
imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's
natural life or with death.
72(1)
Disclosure of identity of
Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
the victim of certain
and fine.
offences, etc.
Printing or publication of
Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
a proceeding without prior
and fine.
permission of court.
Assault or use of criminal
Imprisonment for 1 year
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
force to woman with intent which may extend to
to outrage her modesty.
5 years and fine.
75(2)
Sexual harassment and
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
punishment for sexual
with 3 years, or fine,
harassment specified in
or both.
clause (i) or clause (ii) or
clause (iii) of sub-section (1).
75(3)
Sexual harassment and
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
punishment for sexual
or fine, or both.
harassment specified in
clause (iv) of sub-section (1).
Assault or use of criminal
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
force to woman with intent than 3 years but which
to disrobe.
may extend to 7 years
and fine.
Voyeurism.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Court of Session.
than 1 year but which may
extend to 3 years and fine.
Second or subsequent
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
conviction.
than 3 years but which may
extend to 7 years and fine.
78(2)
Stalking.
Imprisonment up to
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
3 years and fine.
Second or subsequent
Imprisonment up to
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
conviction.
5 years and fine.
Uttering any word or
Simple imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
making any gesture
3 years and fine.
intended to insult the
modesty of a woman, etc.
80(2)
Dowry death.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
than 7 years but which
may extend to imprisonment
for life.
A man by deceit causing
Imprisonment for 10 years
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the
a woman not lawfully
and fine.
first class.
married to him to believe,
that she is lawfully married
to him and to cohabit with
him in that belief.

82(1)
Marrying again during the
Imprisonment for 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
life time of a husband or
and fine.
class.
wife.
82(2)
Same offence with
Imprisonment for 10 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
concealment of the former and fine.
class.
marriage from the person
with whom subsequent
marriage is contracted.
A person with fraudulent
Imprisonment up to 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
intention going through
and fine.
class.
the ceremony of being
married, knowing that he
is not thereby lawfully
married.
Enticing or taking away or
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
detaining with a criminal
or fine, or both.
intent a married woman.
Punishment for subjecting
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable if information
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
a married woman to cruelty.
and fine.
relating to the
class.
commission of the
offence is given to an
officer in charge of a
police station by the
person aggrieved by the
offence or by any
person related to her by
blood, marriage or
adoption or if there is
no such relative, by any
public servant belonging
to such class or category
as may be notified by
the State Government
in this behalf.
Kidnapping, abducting or
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
inducing woman to compel and fine.
her marriage, etc.
Causing miscarriage.
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
or fine, or both.
class.
If the woman be quick
Imprisonment for 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
with child.
and fine.
class.
Causing miscarriage without
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
women's consent.
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
90(1)
Death caused by an act done Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
with intent to cause
and fine.
miscarriage.
90(2)
If act done without
Imprisonment for life,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
women's consent.
or as above.
Act done with intent to
Imprisonment for 10 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
prevent a child being born
or fine, or both.
alive, or to cause it to die
after its birth.
Causing death of a quick
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
unborn child by an act
and fine.
amounting to culpable
homicide.

Exposure of a child under
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the
12 years of age by parent
or fine, or both.
first class.
or person having care of it
with intention of wholly
abandoning it.
Concealment of birth by
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the
secret disposal of dead
or fine, or both.
first class.
body.
Hiring, employing or
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the
engaging a child to commit than 3 years but which may
first class.
an offence.
extend to 10 years
and fine.
If offence be committed.
Same as for the offence
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
committed.
committed is triable.
Procuration of child.
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
and fine.
Kidnapping or abducting a
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
child under ten years with
and fine.
class.
intent to steal from
its person.
Selling child for purposes
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of prostitution, etc.
and fine.
Buying child for purposes
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of prostitution, etc.
than 7 years but which may
extend to 14 years and fine.
103(1)
Murder.
Death or imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
life and fine.
103(2)
Murder by group of five
Death or with imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
or more persons.
for life and fine.
Murder by life-convict.
Death or imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person's
natural life.
Culpable homicide not
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
amounting to murder, if act Imprisonment for not less
by which the death is
than 5 years but which
caused is done with
may extend to 10 years
intention of causing death,
and fine.
etc.
If act be done with
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
knowledge that it is
and with fine.
likely to cause death, but
without any intention to
cause death, etc.
106(1)
Causing death by
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
negligence.
and fine.
class.
Causing death by negligence Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
by registered medical
and fine
class.
practitioner.
106(2)
Causing death by rash and
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
negligent driving of
and fine.
class.
vehicle and escaping.
Abetment of suicide of
Death, or imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
child or person of unsound
for life, or imprisonment
mind, etc.
for 10 years and fine.
Abetment of suicide.
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
and fine.
109(1)
Attempt to murder.
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
and fine.

If such act causes hurt to
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
any person.
as above.
109(2)
Attempt by life-convict to Death, or imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
murder, if hurt is caused.
for life which shall mean
the remainder of that
person's natural life.
Attempt to commit culpable Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
homicide.
or fine, or both.
If such act causes hurt to
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
any person.
or fine, or both.
111(2)(a) Organised crime resulting
Death or imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
in death of any person.
life and fine of not less
than 10 lakh rupees.
111(2)(b) In any other case.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
than 5 years but which may
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine of not less
than 5 lakh rupees.
111(3)
Abetting, attempting,
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
conspiring or knowingly
than 5 years but which may
facilitating the commission extend to imprisonment
of organised crime.
for life and fine of not less
than 5 lakh rupees.
111(4)
Being a member of an
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
organised crime syndicate.
than 5 years but which may
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine of not less
than 5 lakh rupees.
111(5)
Intentionally harbouring or Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
concealing any person who than 3 years but which may
committed offence of
extend to imprisonment
organised crime.
for life and fine of not less
than 5 lakh rupees.
111(6)
Possessing property derived, Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
or obtained from the
than 3 years but which may
commission of organised
extend to imprisonment
crime.
for life and fine of
not less than 2 lakh rupees.
111(7)
Possessing property on
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
behalf of a member of an
than 3 years but which may
organised crime syndicate.
extend to imprisonment
for 10 years and fine of
not less than 1 lakh
rupees.
Petty Organised crime.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
than 1 year but which may
class.
extend to 7 years and fine.
113(2)(a) Terrorist act resulting in
Death or imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the death of any person.
for life and fine.
113(2)(b) In any other case.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
than 5 years but which may
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine.
113(3)
Conspiring, attempting,
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
abetting, etc., or knowingly than 5 years but which may
facilitating the commission extend to imprisonment
of terrorist act.
for life and fine.

113(4)
Organising camps, training, Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
etc., for commission of
than 5 years but which may
terrorist act.
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine.
113(5)
Being a member of an
Imprisonment for life and
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
organisation involved in
fine.
terrorist act.
113(6)
Harbouring, concealing,
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
etc., of any person who
than 3 years but which may
committed a terrorist act.
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine.
113(7)
Possessing property derived Imprisonment for life
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
or obtained from commission and fine.
of terrorist act.
115(2)
Voluntarily causing hurt.
Imprisonment for 1 year
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine of 10,000 rupees,
or both.
117(2)
Voluntarily causing grievous
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
hurt.
and fine.
117(3)
If hurt to results in
Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
permanent disability or
not less than 10 years but
persistent vegetative state. which may extend to
imprisonment for life
which shall mean the
remainder of that person's
natural life.
117(4)
Grievous hurt caused by a
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
group of 5 or more persons. and fine.
118(1)
Voluntarily causing hurt by
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
dangerous weapons or
or fine of 20,000 rupees,
means.
or both.
118(2)
Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment for life or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
hurt by dangerous weapons
imprisonment of not less
class.
or means [except as
than 1 year but which may
provided in section 122(2)]. extend to 10 years and fine.
119(1)
Voluntarily causing hurt to
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
extort property, or to
and fine.
class.
constrain to an illegal act.
119(2)
Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
hurt for any purpose
imprisonment for 10 years
referred to in sub-section (1).
and fine.
120(1)
Voluntarily causing hurt to
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
extort confession or
and fine.
class.
information, or to compel
restoration of property, etc.
120(2)
Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
hurt to extort confession or and fine.
information, or to compel
restoration of property, etc.
121(1)
Voluntarily causing hurt to
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
deter public servant from
or fine, or both.
class.
his duty.
121(2)
Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment not less than
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
hurt to deter public servant 1 year, or imprisonment
from his duty.
for 10 years and fine.

122(1)
Voluntarily causing hurt on Imprisonment for 1 month,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
grave and sudden provocation, or fine of 5,000 rupees, or
not intending to hurt any
both.
other than the person who
gave the provocation.
122(2)
Causing grievous hurt on
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
grave and sudden
or fine of 10,000 rupees,
class.
provocation, not intending or both.
to hurt any other than the
person who gave the
provocation.
Causing hurt by means of
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
poison, etc., with intent to and fine.
commit an offence.
124(1)
Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
hurt by use of acid, etc.
than 10 years but which may
extend to imprisonment
for life and fine.
124(2)
Voluntarily throwing or
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
attempting to throw acid.
but which may extend to
7 years and fine.
Doing any act endangering
Imprisonment for 3 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
human life or personal
or fine of 2,500 rupees,
safety of others.
or both.
125(a)
Where hurt is caused.
Imprisonment for 6 months, Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine of 5,000 rupees,
or both.
125(b)
Where grievous hurt is
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
caused.
or fine of 10,000 rupees,
or both.
126(2)
Wrongfully restraining any Simple imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
person.
1 month, or fine of 5,000
rupees, or both.
127(2)
Wrongfully confining any
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
person.
or fine of 5,000 rupees,
or both.
127(3)
Wrongfully confining for
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
three or more days.
or fine of 10,000 rupees,
or both.
127(4)
Wrongfully confining for
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
10 or more days.
and fine of 10,000 rupees.
class.
127(5)
Keeping any person in
Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of
wrongful confinement,
in addition to any term of
the first class.
knowing that a writ has
imprisonment to under
been issued for his liberation.
any other section and fine.
127(6)
Wrongful confinement in
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
secret.
in addition to other
class.
punishment which he is
liable to and fine.
127(7)
Wrongful confinement for
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
the purpose of extorting
and fine.
property, or constraining to
an illegal act, etc.
127(8)
Wrongful confinement for
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
the purpose of extorting
and fine.
confession or information,
or for compelling restoration
of property, etc.

Assault or criminal force
Imprisonment for 3 months,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
otherwise than on grave
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
provocation.
or both.
Assault or use of criminal
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
force to deter public servant or fine, or both.
from discharge of his duty.
Assault or criminal force
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
with intent to dishonour a
or fine, or both.
person, otherwise than on
grave and sudden
provocation.
Assault or criminal force
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
in attempt to commit theft or fine, or both.
of property worn or carried
by a person.
Assault or use of criminal
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
force in attempt wrongfully or fine of 5,000 rupees,
to confine a person.
or both.
Assault or use of criminal
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
force on grave and sudden
one month, or fine of
provocation.
1,000 rupees, or both.
137(2)
Kidnapping.
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
and fine.
class.
139(1)
Kidnapping a child for
Rigorous imprisonment not
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
purposes of begging.
be less than 10 years but
class.
which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and
fine.
139(2)
Maiming a child for purposes
Imprisonment not be less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of begging.
than 20 years which may
extend to remainder of
that person's natural life,
and fine.
140(1)
Kidnapping or abducting in Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
order to murder.
rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and fine.
140(2)
Kidnapping for ransom,
Death, or imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
etc.
life and fine.
140(3)
Kidnapping or abducting
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
with intent secretly and
and fine.
class.
wrongfully to confine a
person.
140(4)
Kidnapping or abducting in Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
order to subject a person to and fine.
grievous hurt, slavery, etc.
Importation of a girl or boy
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
from foreign country.
and fine.
Wrongfully concealing or
Punishment for kidnapping
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court by which the
keeping in confinement,
or abduction.
kidnapping or abduction
kidnapped or abducted
is triable.
person.
143(2)
Trafficking of person.
Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
not less than 7 years but
which may extend to
10 years and fine.
143(3)
Trafficking of more than
Rigorous imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
one person.
not less than 10 years but
which may extend to
imprisonment for life and
fine.

143(4)
Trafficking of a child.
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
for not less than 10 years
but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and
fine.
143(5)
Trafficking of more than
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
one child.
for not less than 14 years
but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and
fine.
143(6)
Person convicted of offence Imprisonment for life
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
of trafficking of child on
which shall mean the
more than one occasion.
remainder of that person's
natural life and fine.
143(7)
Public servant or a police
Imprisonment for life
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
officer involved in
which shall mean the
trafficking of child.
remainder of that person's
natural life and fine.
144(1)
Exploitation of a trafficked Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
child.
for not less than 5 years
but which may extend to
10 years and fine.
144(2)
Exploitation of a trafficked Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
person.
for not less than 3 years
but which may extend to
7 years and fine.
Habitual dealing in slaves.
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
Unlawful compulsory
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
labour.
or fine, or both.
Waging or attempting to
Death, or imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
wage war, or abetting the
for life and fine.
waging of war, against the
Government of India.
Conspiring to commit
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
certain offences against the imprisonment for 10 years
State.
and fine.
Collecting arms, etc., with
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the intention of waging war imprisonment for 10 years
against the Government of and fine.
India.
Concealing with intent to
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
facilitate a design to wage
and fine.
war.
Assaulting President,
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
Governor, etc., with intent and fine.
to compel or restrain the
exercise of any lawful power.
Act endangering sovereignty,
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
unity and integrity of
imprisonment for 7 years
India.
and fine.
Waging war against
Imprisonment for life and
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
Government of any
fine, or imprisonment for
foreign State at peace with
7 years and fine, or fine.
the Government of India.
Committing depredation on Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the territories of any foreign
and fine, and forfeiture of
state at peace with the
certain property.
Government of India.

Receiving property taken
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
by war or depredation
and fine, and forfeiture of
mentioned in sections 153
certain property.
and 154.
Public servant voluntarily
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
allowing prisoner of state
imprisonment for 10 years
or war in his custody to
and fine.
escape.
Public servant negligently
Simple imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
suffering prisoner of State
3 years and fine.
class.
or war in his custody to
escape.
Aiding escape of, rescuing
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
or harbouring such prisoner. imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
Abetting mutiny, or
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
attempting to seduce an
imprisonment for 10 years
officer, soldier, sailor or
and fine.
airman from his allegiance
or duty.
Abetment of mutiny, if
Death, or imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
mutiny is committed in
for life, or imprisonment
consequence thereof.
for 10 years and fine.
Abetment of assault by an
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
officer, soldier, sailor or
and fine.
class.
airman on his superior
officer, when in execution
of his office.
Abetment of such assault,
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
if the assault committed.
and fine.
class.
Abetment of the desertion
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
of an officer, soldier, sailor or fine, or both.
or airman.
Harbouring deserter.
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
Deserter concealed on
Fine of 3,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
board merchant vessel
through negligence of
master or person in charge
thereof.
Abetment of act of
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
insubordination by an
or fine, or both.
officer, soldier, sailor or
airman if the offence be
committed in consequence.
Wearing garb or carrying
Imprisonment for 3 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
token used by soldier, sailor or fine of 2,000 rupees, or
or airman.
both.
Bribery.
Imprisonment for 1 year
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
or fine, or both, or if
class.
treating only, fine only.
Undue influence or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
personation at an election. or fine, or both.
class.
False statement in connection Fine.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
with an election.
class.
Illegal payments in
Fine of 10,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
connection with elections.
class.

Failure to keep election
Fine of 5,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
accounts.
class.
Counterfeiting coins,
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
government stamps,
imprisonment for 10 years
currency-notes or
and fine.
bank-notes.
Using as genuine forged or
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
counterfeit coin, Government imprisonment for 10 years
stamp currency-notes or
and fine.
bank-notes.
Possession of forged or
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
counterfeit coin, Government or fine, or both.
stamp, currency-notes or
bank-notes.
Making, buying, selling or
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
possessing machinery,
imprisonment for 10 years
instrument or material for
and fine.
forging or counterfeiting
coins, Government stamp,
currency-notes or
bank-notes.
182(1)
Making or using documents Fine of 300 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
resembling currency-notes
or bank-notes.
182(2)
On refusal to disclose the
Fine of 600 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
name and address of the
printer.
Effacing any writing from a Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
substance bearing a
or fine, or both.
class.
Government stamp, removing
from a document a stamp
used for it, with intent to
cause a loss to Government.
Using a Government stamp Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
known to have been before or fine, or both.
used.
Erasure of mark denoting
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
that stamps have been used. or fine, or both.
class.
Fictitious stamps.
Fine of 200 rupees.
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
Person employed in a Mint Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
causing coin to be of a
and fine.
class.
different weight or
composition from that
fixed by law.
Unlawfully taking from a
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
Mint any coining
and fine.
class.
instrument.
189(2)
Being member of an
Imprisonment for 6 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
unlawful assembly.
or fine, or both.
189(3)
Joining or continuing in an Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
unlawful assembly, knowing or fine, or both.
that it has been commanded
to disperse.
189(4)
Joining an unlawful assembly Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
armed with any deadly
or fine, or both.
weapon.

189(5)
Knowingly joining or
Imprisonment for 6 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
continuing in any assembly or fine, or both.
of five or more persons
after it has been commanded
to disperse.
189(6)
Hiring, engaging or
The same as for a member
Cognizable.
According as
The Court by which the
employing persons to take
of such assembly, and for
offence is bailable
offence is triable.
part in an unlawful assembly.
any offence committed by
or non-bailable.
any member of such
assembly.
189(7)
Harbouring persons hired
Imprisonment for 6 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
for an unlawful assembly.
or fine, or both.
189(8)
Being hired to take part in
Imprisonment for 6 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
an unlawful assembly or
or fine, or both.
riot.
189(9)
Or to go armed.
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
Every member of unlawful
The same as for the
According as offence
According as
The Court by which the
assembly guilty of offence
offence.
is cognizable or nonoffence is bailable
offence is triable.
committed in prosecution
cognizable.
or non-bailable.
of common object.
191(2)
Rioting.
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
191(3)
Rioting, armed with a
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
deadly weapon.
or fine, or both.
class.
Wantonly giving
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
provocation with
or fine, or both.
intent to cause riot, if
rioting be committed.
If not committed.
Imprisonment for 6 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
193(1)
Owner or occupier of land
Fine of 1,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
not giving information of
riot, etc.
193(2)
Person for whose benefit
Fine.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or on whose behalf a riot
takes place not using all
lawful means to prevent it.
193(3)
Agent of owner or occupier Fine.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
for whose benefit a riot is
committed not using all
lawful means to prevent it.
194(2)
Committing affray.
Imprisonment for one
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
month, or fine of
1,000 rupees, or both.
195(1)
Assaulting or obstructing
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of
public servant when
or fine not less than
the first class.
suppressing riot, etc.
25,000 rupees, or both.
195(2)
Threatening to assault or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
attempting to obstruct
or fine, or both.
public servant when
suppressing riot, etc.
196(1)
Promoting enmity between Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
different groups on ground
or fine, or both.
class.
of religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language,
etc., and doing acts
prejudicial to maintenance
of harmony.

196(2)
Promoting enmity between Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
classes in place of worship, and fine.
class.
etc.
197(1)
Imputations, assertions
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
prejudicial to national
or fine, or both.
class.
integration.
197(2)
If committed in a place of
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
public worship, etc.
and fine.
class.
Public servant disobeying
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
direction of the law with
1 year, or fine, or both.
class.
intent to cause injury to
any person.
Public servant disobeying
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
direction under law.
for not less than 6 months
class.
which may extend to
2 years and fine.
Non-treatment of victim
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
by hospital.
or fine, or both.
class.
Public servant framing an
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
incorrect document with
or fine, or both.
class.
intent to cause injury.
Public servant unlawfully
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
engaging in trade.
1 year, or fine, or both,
class.
or community service.
Public servant unlawfully
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
buying or bidding for
2 years, or fine, or both
class.
property.
and confiscation of
property, if purchased.
Personating a public servant.
Imprisonment for not less
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
than 6 months but which
may extend to 3 years
and fine.
Wearing garb or carrying
Imprisonment for 3 months,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
token used by public
or fine of 5,000 rupees, or
servant with fraudulent
both.
intent.
206(a)
Absconding to avoid service Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
of summons or other
1 month, or fine of
proceeding from a public
5,000 rupees, or both.
servant.
206(b)
If summons or notice
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
require attendance in person,
6 months, or fine of
etc., in a Court.
10,000 rupees, or both.
207(a)
Preventing service of
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
summons or other
1 month, or fine of
proceeding, or preventing
5,000 rupees, or both.
publication thereof.
207(b)
If summons, etc., require
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
attendance in person, etc.,
6 months, or fine of
in a Court.
10,000 rupees, or both.
208(a)
Non-attendance in obedience
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
to an order from public
1 month, or fine of
servant.
5,000 rupees, or both.
208(b)
If the order requires personal
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
attendance, etc., in a Court. 6 months, or fine of
10,000 rupees, or both.

Non-appearance in response
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
to a proclamation under
or fine, or both,
class.
section 84 of this Sanhita.
or community service.
In a case where declaration Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
has been made under
and fine.
class.
sub-section (4) of
section 84 of this Sanhita
pronouncing a person as
proclaimed offender.
210(a)
Omission to produce
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
document to public
1 month, or fine of
offence is committed,
servant by person legally
5,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the provisions
bound to produce or deliver
of Chapter XXVIII; or,
it.
if not committed, in a
Court, any Magistrate.
210(b)
If the document is required
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
to be produced in or
6 months, or fine of
offence is committed,
delivered to a Court.
10,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the provisions
of Chapter XXVIII; or,
if not committed, in a
Court, any Magistrate.
211(a)
Intentional omission to
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
give notice or information
1 month, or fine of
to public servant by person 5,000 rupees, or both.
legally bound to give it.
211(b)
If the notice or information
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
required respects the
6 months, or fine of
commission of an offence,
10,000 rupees, or both.
etc.
211(c)
If the notice or information Imprisonment for 6 months,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
is required by an order
or fine of 1,000 rupees,
passed under sub-section (1) or both.
of section 394 of this
Sanhita.
212(a)
Knowingly furnishing false
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
information to public
6 months, or fine of
servant.
5,000 rupees, or both.
212(b)
If the information required Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respects the commission
or fine, or both.
of an offence, etc.
Refusing oath when duly
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
required to take oath by a
6 months, or fine of
offence is committed,
public servant.
5,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the provisions
of Chapter XXVIII; or,
if not committed, in a
Court, any Magistrate.
Being legally bound to state Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
truth, and refusing to
6 months, or fine of
offence is committed,
answer public servant
5,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the provisions
authorised to question.
of Chapter XXVIII; or,
if not committed, in a
Court, any Magistrate.
Refusing to sign a statement
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
made to a public servant
3 months, or fine of
offence is committed,
when legally required to
3,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the provisions
do so.
of Chapter XXVIII; or,
if not committed, in a
Court, any Magistrate.

Knowingly stating to a
Imprisonment for 3 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
public servant on oath as
and fine.
class.
true that which is false.
Giving false information to Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
a public servant in order to or with fine of
cause him to use his lawful
10,000 rupees, or both.
power to the injury or
annoyance of any person.
Resistance to the taking of Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
property by the lawful
6 months, or fine of
authority of a public servant.
10,000 rupees, or both.
Obstructing sale of property Imprisonment for 1 month,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
offered for sale by authority or fine of 5,000 rupees,
of a public servant.
or both.
Illegal purchase or bid for
Imprisonment for 1 month,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
property offered for sale by or fine of 200 rupees,
authority of public servant. or both.
Obstructing public servant
Imprisonment for 3 months,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
in discharge of his public
or fine of 2,500 rupees,
functions.
or both.
222(a)
Omission to assist public
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
servant when bound by law
1 month, or fine of
to give such assistance.
2,500 rupees, or both.
222(b)
Wilfully neglecting to aid a Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
public servant who demands 6 months, or fine of
aid in the execution of
5,000 rupees, or both.
process, the prevention of
offences, etc.
223(a)
Disobedience to an order
Simple imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
lawfully promulgated by a
6 months, or fine of
public servant, if such
2,500 rupees, or both.
disobedience causes
obstruction, annoyance or
injury to persons lawfully
employed.
223(b)
If such disobedience causes
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
danger to human life, health
or fine of 5,000 rupees,
or safety, or causes or tends or both.
to cause a riot or affray.
Threat of injury to public
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
servant, etc.
or fine, or both.
Threat of injury to induce
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
person to refrain from
or fine, or both.
applying for protection to
public servant.
Attempt to commit suicide Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
to compel or restraint
or fine, or both, or
exercise of lawful power.
community service.
229(1)
Intentionally giving or
Imprisonment for 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
fabricating false evidence
and 10,000 rupees.
class.
in a judicial proceeding.
229(2)
Giving or fabricating false
Imprisonment for 3 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
evidence in any other case. and 5,000 rupees.
230(1)
Giving or fabricating false
Imprisonment for life, or
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
evidence with intent to
rigorous imprisonment
cause any person to be
for 10 years and
convicted of capital offence. 50,000 rupees.

230(2)
If innocent person be
Death, or as above.
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
thereby convicted and
executed.
Giving or fabricating false
The same as for the offence.
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
evidence with intent to
procure conviction of an
offence punishable with
imprisonment for life or
with imprisonment for
7 years, or upwards.
232(1)
Threatening any person to Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
give false evidence.
or fine, or both.
of giving false evidence
is triable.
232(2)
If innocent person is
The same as for the
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court by which offence
convicted and sentenced in offence.
of giving false evidence
consequence of false
is triable.
evidence with death, or
imprisonment for more
than 7 years.
Using in a judicial
The same as for giving or
Non-cognizable.
According as offence
Court by which offence
proceeding evidence known fabricating false evidence.
of giving such
of giving or fabricating
to be false or fabricated.
evidence is bailable
false evidence is triable.
or non-bailable.
Knowingly issuing or signing The same as for giving
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court by which offence
a false certificate relating
false evidence.
of giving false evidence
to any fact of which such
is triable.
certificate is by law
admissible in evidence.
Using as a true certificate
The same as for giving
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court by which offence
one known to be false in a
false evidence.
of giving false evidence
material point.
is triable.
False statement made in any The same as for giving
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court by which offence
declaration which is by law
false evidence.
of giving false evidence
receivable as evidence.
is triable.
Using as true any such
The same as for giving
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court by which offence
declaration known to be
false evidence.
of giving false evidence
false.
is triable.
238(a)
Causing disappearance of
Imprisonment for 7 years
According as the
Bailable.
Court of Session.
evidence of an offence
and fine.
offence in relation to
committed, or giving false
which disappearance
information touching it to
of evidence is caused
screen the offender, if a
is cognizable or noncapital offence.
cognizable.
238(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
and fine.
class.
imprisonment for 10 years.
238(c)
If punishable with less than Imprisonment for oneNon-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court by which the
10 years' imprisonment.
fourth of the longest term
offence is triable.
provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.
Intentional omission to
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
give information of an
6 months, or fine of
offence by a person legally 5,000 rupees, or both.
bound to inform.
Giving false information
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respecting an offence
or fine, or both.
committed.
Secreting or destroying any Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
document to prevent its
or fine of 5,000 rupees,
class.
production as evidence.
or both.

False personation for the
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
purpose of any act or
or fine, or both.
class.
proceeding in a suit or
criminal prosecution, or
for becoming bail or
security.
Fraudulent removal or
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
concealment, etc., of
or fine, of 5,000 rupees,
property to prevent its
or both.
seizure as a forfeiture or
in satisfaction of a fine
under sentence, or in
execution of a decree.
Claiming property without
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
right, or practising deception or fine, or both.
touching any right to it, to
prevent its being taken as a
forfeiture, or in satisfaction
of a fine under sentence, or
in execution of a decree.
Fraudulently suffering a
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
decree to pass for a sum
or fine, or both.
class.
not due, or suffering decree
to be executed after it has
been satisfied.
False claim in a Court.
Imprisonment for 2 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
and fine.
class.
Fraudulently obtaining a
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
decree for a sum not due,
or fine, or both.
class.
or causing a decree to be
executed after it has been
satisfied.
248(a)
False charge of offence
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
made with intent to injure.
or fine of 2 lakh rupees,
class.
or both.
248(b)
Criminal proceeding
Imprisonment for 10 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court of Session.
instituted on a false charge
and fine.
of an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment
for life, or imprisonment
for ten years or upwards.
249(a)
Harbouring an offender, if
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
the offence is punishable
and fine.
class.
with death.
249(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
and fine.
class.
with imprisonment for
10 years.
249(c)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for oneCognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for 1 year
fourth of the longest term,
class.
and not for 10 years.
and of the descriptions,
provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.
250(a)
Taking gift, etc., to screen
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
an offender from
and fine.
class.
punishment if the offence
is punishable with death.

250(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
and fine.
class.
with imprisonment for
10 years.
250(c)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for oneCognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for less than fourth of the longest term
class.
10 years.
provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.
251(a)
Offering gift or restoration Imprisonment for 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
of property in consideration and fine.
class.
of screening offender if the
offence is punishable with
death.
251(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
and fine.
class.
with imprisonment for
10 years.
251(c)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for oneNon-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for less
fourth of the longest term,
class.
than 10 years.
provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.
Taking gift to help to
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
recover movable property
or fine, or both.
class.
of which a person has been
deprived by an offence
without causing apprehension
of offender.
253(a)
Harbouring an offender who Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
has escaped from custody,
and fine.
class.
or whose apprehension has
been ordered, if the offence
is punishable with death.
253(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
with or without fine.
class.
with imprisonment for
10 years.
253(c)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for oneCognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for 1 year
fourth of the longest term
class.
and not for 10 years.
provided for the offence,
or fine, or both.
Harbouring robbers or
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
dacoits.
for 7 years and fine.
class.
Public servant disobeying a Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
direction of law with intent or fine, or both.
to save person from
punishment, or property
from forfeiture.
Public servant framing an
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
incorrect record or writing
or fine, or both.
class.
with intent to save person
from punishment, or
property from forfeiture.
Public servant in a judicial
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
proceeding corruptly making or fine, or both.
class.
and pronouncing an order,
report, etc. contrary to law.

Commitment for trial or
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
confinement by a person
or fine, or both.
class.
having authority, who
knows that he is acting
contrary to law.
259(a)
Intentional omission to
Imprisonment for 7 years,
According as the
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
apprehend on the part of
with or without fine.
offence in relation to
class.
a public servant bound by
which such omission
law to apprehend an
has been made is
offender, if the offence
cognizable or nonis punishable with death.
cognizable.
259(b)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
with or without fine.
class.
imprisonment for 10 years.
259(c)
If punishable with
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for less
with or without fine.
class.
than 10 years.
260(a)
Intentional omission to
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
apprehend on the part of a imprisonment for 14 years,
public servant bound by
with or without fine.
law to apprehend person
under sentence of a Court
if under sentence of death.
260(b)
If under sentence of
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for life or
with or without fine.
class.
imprisonment for 10 years,
or upwards.
260(c)
If under sentence of
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
imprisonment for less than or fine, or both.
class.
10 years or lawfully
committed to custody.
Escape from confinement
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
negligently suffered by a
2 years, or fine, or both.
public servant.
Resistance or obstruction
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
by a person to his lawful
or fine, or both.
apprehension.
263(a)
Resistance or obstruction
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
to the lawful apprehension
or fine, or both.
of any person, or rescuing
him from lawful custody.
263(b)
If charged with an offence
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
punishable with imprisonand fine.
class.
ment for life or imprisonment for 10 years.
263(c)
If charged with offence
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
punishable with death.
and fine.
class.
263(d)
If the person is sentenced
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
to imprisonment for life,
and fine.
class.
or imprisonment for
10 years, or upwards.
263(e)
If under sentence of death.
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
Omission to apprehend, or
sufferance of escape on part
of public servant, in cases
not otherwise provided for:—

(a) in case of intentional
Imprisonment for 3 years, Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
omission or sufferance;
or fine, or both.
class.
(b) in case of negligent
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
omission or sufferance.
2 years, or fine, or both.
Resistance or obstruction to Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
lawful apprehension, or
6 months, or fine, or both.
escape or rescue in cases
not otherwise provided for.
Violation of condition of
Punishment of original
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
The Court by which the
remission of punishment.
sentence, or if part of the
original offence was
punishment has been
triable.
undergone, the residue.
Intentional insult or
Simple imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
The Court in which the
interruption to a public
6 months, or fine of
offence is committed,
servant sitting in any stage 5,000 rupees, or both.
subject to the
of a judicial proceeding.
provisions of Chapter
XXVIII; or, if not
committed, in a Court,
any Magistrate.
Personation of an assessor. Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
or fine, or both.
class.
Failure by person released
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
on bond or bail bond to
or fine, or both.
appear in Court.
Negligently doing any act
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
known to be likely to spread 6 months, or fine, or both.
infection of any disease
dangerous to life.
Malignantly doing any act
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
known to be likely to spread or fine, or both.
infection of any disease
dangerous to life.
Knowingly disobeying any
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
quarantine rule.
6 months, or fine, or both.
Adulterating food or drink
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
intended for sale, so as to
6 months, or fine of
make the same noxious.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Selling any food or drink as Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
food and drink, knowing
6 months, or fine of
the same to be noxious.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Adulterating any drug or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
medical preparation intended or fine of 5,000 rupees,
for sale so as to lessen its
or both.
efficacy, or to change its
operation, or to make it
noxious.
Sale of adulterated drugs.
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
6 months, or fine of
5,000 rupees, or both.
Knowingly selling of drug
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
as a different drug or
6 months, or fine of
preparation.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Fouling water of public
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
spring or reservoir.
6 months, or fine of
5,000 rupees, or both.
Making atmosphere
Fine of 1,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
noxious to health.

Rash driving or riding on
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
a public way.
6 months, or fine of
1,000 rupees, or both.
Rash navigation of vessel.
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
6 months, or fine of
10,000 rupees, or both.
Exhibition of a false light,
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
mark or buoy.
and fine which shall not
class.
be less than 10,000 rupees.
Conveying person by water Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
for hire in unsafe or
6 months, or fine of
overloaded vessel.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Causing danger or
Fine of 5,000 rupees.
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
obstruction in public way
or line of navigation.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to poisonous
6 months, or fine of
substance.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to fire or
6 months, or fine of
combustible matter.
2,000 rupees, or both.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to explosive
6 months, or fine of
substance.
5,000 rupees, or both.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to machinery.
6 months, or fine of
5,000 rupees, or both.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to pulling down,
6 months, or fine of
repairing or constructing
5,000 rupees, or both.
buildings, etc.
Negligent conduct with
Imprisonment for 6
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
respect to animal.
months, or fine of 5,000
rupees, or both.
Committing public nuisance Fine of 1,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
in cases not otherwise
provided for.
Continuance of nuisance
Simple imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
after injunction to
6 months, or fine of
discontinue.
5,000 rupees, or both.
294(2)
Sale, etc., of obscene
On first conviction, with
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
books, etc.
imprisonment for 2 years,
and with fine of
5,000 rupees, and, in the
event of second or
subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment for
5 years, and with fine
of 10,000 rupees.
Sale, etc., of obscene
On first conviction, with
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
objects to child.
imprisonment for 3 years,
and with fine of
2,000 rupees, and in the
event of second or
subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment for
7 years, and with fine of
5,000 rupees.

Obscene acts and songs.
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
3 months, or fine of
1,000 rupees, or both.
297(1)
Keeping a lottery office.
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
6 months, or fine, or
both.
297(2)
Publishing proposals
Fine of 5,000 rupees.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
relating to lotteries.
Defiling, etc., place of
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
worship, with intent to
2 years, or fine, or both.
insult the religion of any
class.
Deliberate and malicious
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
acts, intended to outrage
3 years, or fine, or both.
class.
religious feelings of any
class by insulting its religion
or religious beliefs.
Disturbing religious
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
assembly.
or fine, or both.
Trespassing on burial
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
places, etc.
or fine, or both.
Uttering words, etc., with
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
deliberate intent to wound
or fine, or both.
religious feelings.
303(2)
Theft.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
Rigorous imprisonment
for not be less than
1 year but which may
extend to 5 years and fine.
Where value of property
Upon return of the value
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
is less than 5,000 rupees.
of property or restoration
of the stolen property,
shall be punished with
community service.
304(2)
Snatching.
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
3 years and fine.
Theft in a dwelling house,
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or means of transportation 7 years and fine.
or place of worship, etc.
Theft by clerk or servant
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
of property in possession
7 years and fine.
of master or employer.
Theft after preparation
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
made for causing death,
for 10 years and fine.
class.
hurt or restraint in order
to the committing of theft.
308(2)
Extortion.
Imprisonment for 7
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
years, or fine, or both.
class.
308(3)
Putting or attempting to
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
put in fear of injury, in
or fine, or both.
order to commit extortion.
308(4)
Putting or attempting to
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
put a person in fear of
7 years and fine.
class.
death or grievous hurt in
order to commit extortion.

308(5)
Extortion by putting a
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
person in fear of death or
10 years and fine.
class.
grievous hurt.
308(6)
Putting a person in fear
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
of accusation of an offence 10 years and fine.
class.
punishable with death,
imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years
in order to commit
extortion.
308(7)
Extortion by threat of
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
accusation of an offence
10 years and fine.
class.
punishable with death,
imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for 10 years.
309(4)
Robbery.
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
for 10 years and fine.
class.
If robbery committed on
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
highway between sunset
for 14 years.
class.
and sunrise.
309(5)
Attempt to commit
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
robbery.
for 7 years and fine.
class.
309(6)
Causing hurt.
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
rigorous imprisonment
class.
for 10 years and fine.
310(2)
Dacoity.
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
rigorous imprisonment
for 10 years and fine.
310(3)
Murder in dacoity.
Death, imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
life, or rigorous
imprisonment for not less
than 10 years and fine.
310(4)
Making preparation to
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
commit dacoity.
for 10 years and fine.
310(5)
Being one of five or more
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
persons assembled for the
for 7 years and fine.
purpose of committing
dacoity.
310(6)
Belonging to a gang of
Imprisonment for life,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
persons associated for the
or rigorous imprisonment
purpose of habitually
for 10 years and fine.
committing dacoity.
Robbery or dacoity, with
Imprisonment for not
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
attempt to cause death or
less than 7 years.
grievous hurt.
Attempt to commit robbery Imprisonment for not
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
or dacoity when armed
less than 7 years.
with deadly weapon.
Belonging to a wandering
Rigorous imprisonment
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
gang of persons associated
for 7 years and fine.
class.
for the purpose of habitually
committing thefts.
Dishonest misappropriation Imprisonment of not less
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
of movable property, or
than 6 months but which
converting it to one's
may extend to 2 years
own use.
and fine.
Dishonest misappropriation Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
of property possessed by
3 years and fine.
class.
deceased person at the time
of his death.

If by clerk or person
Imprisonment for 7 years.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
employed by deceased.
class.
316(2)
Criminal breach of trust.
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
or fine, or both.
class.
316(3)
Criminal breach of trust by Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
a carrier, wharfinger, etc.
and fine.
class.
316(4)
Criminal breach of trust by Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
a clerk or servant.
and fine.
class.
316(5)
Criminal breach of trust by Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
public servant or by banker, imprisonment for 10 years
class.
merchant or agent, etc.
and fine.
317(2)
Dishonestly receiving
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
stolen property knowing
or fine, or both.
it to be stolen.
317(3)
Dishonestly receiving
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
stolen property, knowing
rigorous imprisonment
that it was obtained by
for 10 years and fine.
dacoity.
317(4)
Habitually dealing in stolen Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
property.
imprisonment for 10 years
and fine.
317(5)
Assisting in concealment or Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
disposal of stolen property, or fine, or both.
knowing it to be stolen.
318(2)
Cheating.
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
318(3)
Cheating a person whose
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
interest the offender was
or fine, or both.
bound, either by law or by
legal contract, to protect.
318(4)
Cheating and dishonestly
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
inducing delivery of
and fine.
class.
property.
319(2)
Cheating by personation.
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or with fine, or with both.
Fraudulent removal or
Imprisonment of not be
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
concealment of property,
less than 6 months but
etc., to prevent distribution which may extend to
among creditors.
2 years, or fine, or both.
Dishonest or fraudulently
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
preventing from being
or fine, or both.
made available for his
creditors a debt or demand
due to the offender.
Dishonest or fraudulent
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
execution of deed of
or fine, or both.
transfer containing a false
statement of consideration.
Fraudulent removal or
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
concealment of property,
or fine, or both.
of himself or any other
person or assisting in the
doing thereof, or dishonestly
releasing any demand or
claim to which he is entitled.

324(2)
Mischief.
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
6 months, or fine, or both.
324(3)
Mischief causing loss or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
damage to any property
or fine, or both.
including property of
Government or Local
Authority.
324(4)
Mischief causing loss or
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
damage to the amount of
or fine, or both.
twenty thousand rupees but
less than 2 lakh rupees.
324(5)
Mischief causing loss or
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
damage to the amount of
or fine, or both.
class.
one lakh rupees or upwards.
324(6)
Mischief with preparation
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
for causing to any person
and fine.
class.
death, or hurt, or wrongful
restraint, or fear of death,
or of hurt, or of wrongful
restraint.
Mischief by killing or
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
maiming animal.
or fine, or both.
class.
326(a)
Mischief by causing
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
diminution of supply of
or fine, or both.
class.
water for agricultural
purposes, etc.
326(b)
Mischief by injury to public Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
road, bridge, navigable river, or fine, or both.
class.
or navigable channel, and
rendering it impassable or
less safe for travelling or
conveying property.
326(c)
Mischief by causing
Imprisonment for 5 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
inundation or obstruction
or with fine, or with both.
class.
to public drainage attended
with damage.
326(d)
Mischief by destroying or
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
moving or rendering less
or fine, or both.
class.
useful a lighthouse or
seamark, or by exhibiting
false lights.
326(e)
Mischief by destroying or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
moving, etc., a landmark
or fine, or both.
fixed by public authority.
326(f)
Mischief by fire or explosive Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
substance with intent to
and fine.
class.
cause damage.
326(g)
Mischief by fire or explosive Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
substance with intent to
imprisonment for 10 years
destroy a house, etc.
and fine.
327(1)
Mischief with intent to
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
destroy or make unsafe a
and fine.
decked vessel or a vessel
of 20 tonnes burden.
327(2)
The mischief described in
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the last section when
imprisonment for 10 years
committed by fire or any
and fine.
explosive substance.

Running vessel with intent
Imprisonment for 10 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
to commit theft, etc.
and fine.
329(3)
Criminal trespass.
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
3 months, or fine of
5,000 rupees, or both.
329(4)
House-trespass.
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or fine of 5,000 rupees,
or both.
331(1)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
house-breaking.
and fine.
331(2)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
house-breaking by night.
and fine.
331(3)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
house-breaking in order to
and fine.
the commission of an
offence punishable with
imprisonment.
If the offence be theft.
Imprisonment for 10 years.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
class.
331(4)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for 5 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
house-breaking by night
and fine.
in order to the commission
of an offence punishable
with imprisonment.
If the offence be theft.
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
14 years.
class.
331(5)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
house-breaking after
10 years and fine.
class.
preparation made for
causing hurt, assault, etc.
331(6)
Lurking house-trespass or
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
house-breaking by night,
14 years and fine.
class.
after preparation made for
causing hurt, etc.
331(7)
Grievous hurt caused whilst Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
committing lurking houseimprisonment for 10 years
trespass or house-breaking. and fine.
331(8)
Death or grievous hurt
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
caused by one of several
imprisonment for 10 years
persons jointly concerned
and fine.
in house-breaking by night,
etc.
332(a)
House-trespass in order to
Imprisonment for life, or
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the commission of an
rigorous imprisonment for
offence punishable with
10 years and fine.
death.
332(b)
House-trespass in order to
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
the commission of an
10 years and fine.
offence punishable with
imprisonment for life.
332(c)
House-trespass in order to
Imprisonment for 2 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
the commission of an
and fine.
offence punishable with
imprisonment.
If the offence is theft.
Imprisonment for 7 years.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.

House-trespass, having
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
made preparation for
and fine.
causing hurt, assault, etc.
334(1)
Dishonestly breaking open
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
or unfastening any closed
or fine, or both.
receptacle containing or
supposed to contain
property.
334(2)
Being entrusted with any
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
closed receptacle containing or fine, or both.
or supposed to contain any
property, and fraudulently
opening the same.
336(2)
Forgery.
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
or fine, or both.
class.
336(3)
Forgery for the purpose of
Imprisonment for 7 years
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
cheating.
and fine.
class.
336(4)
Forgery for the purpose of
Imprisonment for 3 years
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
harming the reputation of
and fine.
class.
any person or knowing that
it is likely to be used for
that purpose.
Forgery of a record of a
Imprisonment for 7 years
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
Court or of a Registrar of
and fine
class.
Births, etc., kept by a
public servant.
Forgery of a valuable
Imprisonment for life,
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
security, will, or authority
or imprisonment for
class.
to make or transfer any
10 years and fine.
valuable security, or to
receive any money, etc.
When the valuable security Imprisonment for life,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
is a promissory note of the or imprisonment for
class.
Central Government.
10 years and fine.
Having possession of a
Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
document, knowing it to be 7 years and fine.
class.
forged, with intent to use it
as genuine; if the document
is one of the description
mentioned in section 337.
If the document is one of
Imprisonment for life,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
the description mentioned
or imprisonment for
class.
in section 338.
7 years and fine.
340(2)
Using as genuine a forged
Punishment for forgery
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
document which is known
of such document.
class.
to be forged.
341(1)
Making or counterfeiting a Imprisonment for life,
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
seal, plate, etc., with intent or imprisonment for
class.
to commit a forgery
7 years and fine.
punishable under section 338
or possessing with like
intent any such seal, plate,
etc., knowing the same to
be counterfeit.

341(2)
Making or counterfeiting a Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
seal, plate, etc., with intent 7 years and fine.
class.
to commit a forgery
punishable otherwise than
under section 338 or
possessing with like intent
any such seal, plate, etc.,
knowing the same to be
counterfeit.
341(3)
Possesses any seal, plate or Imprisonment for
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
other instrument knowing
3 years and fine.
class.
the same to be counterfeit.
341(4)
Fraudulently or dishonestly Same as if he had made
Cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
uses as genuine any seal,
or counterfeited such
class.
plate or other instrument
seal, plate or other
knowing or having reason
instrument.
to believe the same to be
counterfeit.
342(1)
Counterfeiting a device or
Imprisonment for life, or
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
mark used for authenticating imprisonment for
class.
documents described in
7 years and fine.
section 338 or possessing
counterfeit marked material.
342(2)
Counterfeiting a device or
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
mark used for authenticating 7 years and fine.
class.
documents other than those
described in section 338 or
possessing counterfeit
marked material.
Fraudulently destroying or
Imprisonment for life,
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of the first
defacing, or attempting to
or imprisonment for
class.
destroy or deface, or
7 years and fine.
secreting, a will, etc.
Falsification of accounts.
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
7 years, or fine, or both.
class.
345(3)
Using a false property
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
mark with intent to
or fine, or both.
deceive or injure any
person.
Removing, destroying or
Imprisonment for 1 year,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
defacing property mark
or fine, or both.
with intent to cause injury.
347(1)
Counterfeiting a property
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
mark used by another, with or fine, or both.
intent to cause damage or
injury.
347(2)
Counterfeiting a property
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
mark used by a public
3 years and fine.
class.
servant, or any mark used
by him to denote the
manufacture, quality, etc.,
of any property.
Fraudulently making or
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
having possession of any
3 years, or fine, or both.
class.
die, plate or other
instrument for
counterfeiting any public
or private property mark.

Knowingly selling goods
Imprisonment for
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
marked with a counterfeit
1 year, or fine, or both.
property mark.
350(1)
Fraudulently making a
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
false mark upon any
or fine, or both.
package or receptacle
containing goods, with
intent to cause it to be
believed that it contains
goods, which it does not
contain, etc.
350(2)
Making use of any such
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
false mark.
or fine, or both.
351(2)
Criminal intimidation.
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable
Bailable
Any Magistrate.
or fine, or both.
351(3)
If threat be to cause death
Imprisonment for 7 years,
Non-cognizable
Bailable
Magistrate of the first
or grievous hurt, etc.
or fine, or both.
class.
351(4)
Criminal intimidation by
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
anonymous communication in addition to the
class.
or having taken precaution
punishment under
to conceal whence the
section 351(1).
threat comes.
Insult intended to provoke
Imprisonment for 2 years,
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
breach of the peace.
or fine, or both.
353(1)
False statement, rumour,
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Non-cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
etc., circulated with intent
or fine, or both.
to cause mutiny or offence
against the public peace.
353(2)
False statement, rumour,
Imprisonment for 3 years,
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
etc., with intent to create
or fine, or both.
enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different classes.
353(3)
False statement, rumour,
etc., made in place of
worship, etc., with intent
to create enmity, hatred or
ill-will.
Act caused by inducing a
person to believe that he
will be rendered an object
of Divine displeasure.
Appearing in a public
place, etc., in a state of
intoxication, and causing
annoyance to any person.
356(2)
Defamation against the
President or the VicePresident or the Governor
of a State or Administrator
of a Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his
conduct in the discharge of
his public functions when
instituted upon a
complaint made by the
Public Prosecutor.
Defamation in any other
case.
Imprisonment for 5 years
and fine.
Imprisonment for 1 year,
or fine, or both.
Simple imprisonment for
24 hours, or fine of 1,000
rupees, or both or with
community service.
Simple imprisonment for 2
years, or fine or both, or
community service.
Simple imprisonment for 2
years, or fine or both, or
community service.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Any Magistrate.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court of Session.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
class.

356(3)
Printing or engraving
matter knowing it to be
defamatory against the
President or the VicePresident or the Governor
of a State or Administrator
of a Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his
conduct in the discharge of
his public functions when
instituted upon a
complaint made by the
Public Prosecutor.
Printing or engraving
matter knowing it to be
defamatory, in any other
case.
356(4)
Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing
defamatory matter,
knowing it to contain such
matter against the
President or the VicePresident or the Governor
of a State or Administrator
of a Union territory or a
Minister in respect of his
conduct in the discharge of
his public functions when
instituted upon a
complaint made by the
Public Prosecutor.
Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing
defamatory matter,
knowing it to contain such
matter in any other case.
Being bound to attend on
or supply the wants of a
person who is helpless
from youth, unsoundness
of mind or disease, and
voluntarily omitting to do
so.
Simple imprisonment for
2 years, or fine, or both.
Simple imprisonment for
2 years, or fine, or both.
Simple imprisonment for
2 years, or fine, or both.
Simple imprisonment for
2 years, or fine, or both.
Imprisonment for 3
months, or fine of 5,000
rupees, or both.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court of Session.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
class.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Court of Session.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Magistrate of the first
class.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.
II.—CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS
Offence
Cognizable or
Bailable or
By what court
non-cognizable.
non-bailable.
triable.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Court of Session.
Cognizable.
Non-bailable.
Magistrate of
the first class.
If punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment
for more than 7 years.
If punishable with imprisonment for 3 years and upwards but not more
than 7 years.
If punishable with imprisonment for less than 3 years or with fine only.
Non-cognizable.
Bailable.
Any Magistrate.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 522)
FORM No.1
NOTICE FOR APPEARANCE BY THE POLICE
[See section 35(3)]
Serial No…….
Police Station………
To,
.................................
[Name of the Accused/Noticee]
.................................
[Last known Address]
.................................
[Phone No./Email ID (if any)]
In pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 35 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, I hereby inform you that during the investigation of FIR/
Case No ………………….. dated …………… under Section ………………………………… registered at
Police Station ……………………………………………..., it is revealed that there are reasonable
grounds to question you to ascertain facts and circumstances from you, in relation to the
present investigation. Hence you are directed to appear before me at ………..........…… AM/
PM on……………………... at
Police Station.
Name and Designation of the Officer In charge
(Seal)
————

FORM No. 2
SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON
(See section 63)
To..............................................(name of accused) of ..............................................(address)
WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer to a charge of..........................................
..............................................(state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to
appear in person (or by an advocate, before the (Magistrate) of..............................................,
on the..............................................day............................................... Herein fail not.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 3
WARRANT OF ARREST
(See section 72)
To .............................................. (name and designation of the person or persons who is or
are to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS (name of accused) of (address) stands charged with the offence of
...................................................... (state the offence), you are hereby directed to arrest the said
......................................................, and to produce him before me. Herein fail not.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
(See section 73)
This warrant may be endorsed as follows:—
If the said.............................................................. shall give bail himself in the sum of
rupees.............................................. with one surety in the sum of rupees..............................................
(or two sureties each in the sum of rupees.............................................. ) to attend before me on
the.............................................. day of.............................................. and to continue so to attend
until otherwise directed by me, he may be released.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 4
BOND AND BAIL-BOND AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT
(See section 83)
I, ............................................................(name), of..........................................................., being
brought before the District Magistrate of...........................................................(or as the case
may be) under a warrant issued to compel my appearance to answer to the charge
of..........................................................., do hereby bind myself to attend in the Court
of.................................................................on the..................................day of
...........................................................next, to answer to the said charge, and to continue so to
attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of my making default herein, I bind
myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees................................................. .
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Signature)
I do hereby declare myself surety for the above-named..............................................
of.......................................................... that he shall attend before in the Court of
on the.............................................. day of.............................................. next, to answer to the
charge on which he has been arrested, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise
directed by the Court; and, in case of his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to
Government, the sum of rupees............................................................. .
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............. .
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 5
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED
(See section 84)
WHEREAS a complaint has been made before me that................................................... (name,
description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of
.............................................. , punishable under section..............................................
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon
issued that the said.............................................. (name) cannot be found, and whereas it has
been shown to my satisfaction that the said.............................................. (name) has absconded
(or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warranty);
Proclamation is hereby made that the said..............................................
of.............................................. is required to appear at.............................................. (place) before
this Court (or before me) to answer the said complaint on the.............................................. day
of..............................................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 6
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS
(See sections 84, 90 and 93)
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that..............................................(name,
description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of
..............................................(mention the offence concisely) and a warrant has been
issued to compel the attendance of..............................................(name, description and
address of the witness) before this Court to be examined touching the
matter of the said complaint; and whereas it has been returned to the said warrant that the
said..............................................(name of witness) cannot be served, and it has been shown to
my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the
said warrant);
Proclamation is hereby made that the said..............................................(name) is required
to appear at..............................................(place) before the Court..............................................on
the........................................day of.........................................next at..............................................o'clock
to be examined touching..............................................the offence complained of.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 7
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS
(See section 85)
To the officer in charge of the police station at..............................................
WHEREAS a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance
of..............................................(name, description and address) to testify concerning a complaint
pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the said warrant that it cannot be
served; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is
concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); and thereupon a Proclamation
has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said..............................................to
appear and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable property belonging
to the said..............................................to the value of rupees..............................................which
you may find within the District..............................................of..............................................and
to hold the said property under attachment pending the further order of this Court, and to
return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 8
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED
(See section 85)
To..............................................(name and designation of the person or persons who is or are
to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that..............................................(name,
description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the
offence of..............................................punishable under section..............................................of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon
issued that the said..............................................(name) cannot be found; and whereas it has
been shown to my satisfaction that the said..............................................(name) has absconded
(or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the
said..............................................to appear to answer the said charge
within..............................................days; and whereas the said..............................................is
possessed of the following property, other than land paying revenue to Government, in the
village (or town), of.............................................., in the District of ..............................................,
viz.,.............................................., and an order has been made for the attachment thereof;
You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner specified in
clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (3) of section 85, and to hold the same under
attachment pending further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
*Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the nature of the property to be attached.
————

FORM No. 9
ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE
OR COLLECTOR
(See section 85)
To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of..............................................
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that..............................................
(name, description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the
offence of .............................................., punishable under section..............................................of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon
issued that the said..............................................(name) cannot be found; and whereas it has
been shown to my satisfaction that the said..............................................(name) has absconded
(or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation
has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said .......................................
(name) to appear to answer the said charge within.........................................days; and whereas
the said..............................................is possessed of certain land paying revenue to Government
in the village (or town) of.............................................., in the District of..............................................;
You are hereby authorised and requested to cause the said land to be attached, in the
manner specified in clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (4) of section 85, and to
be held under attachment pending the further order of this Court, and to certify without delay
what you may have done in pursuance of this order.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
*Strike out the one which is not desired.
————

FORM No. 10
WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS
(See section 90)
To..............................................(name and designation of the police officer or other person or
persons who is or are to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that..............................................(name
and description of accused) of..............................................(address) has (or is suspected to
have) committed the offence of ..............................................(mention the offence concisely),
and it appears likely that..............................................(name and description of witness) can
give evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and sufficient reason
to believe that he will not attend as a witness on the hearing of the said complaint unless
compelled to do so;
This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said..............................................(name
of witness), and on the..............................................day of..............................................to bring
him before this Court.............................................., to be examined touching the offence
complained of.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 11
WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE
(See section 96)
To..............................................(name and designation of the police officer or other person or
persons who is or are to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS information has been laid..............................................(or complaint has been
made) before me of the commission..............................................(or suspected commission) of
the offence of..............................................(mention the offence concisely), and it has been
made to appear to me that the production of ..............................................(specify the thing
clearly) is essential to the inquiry now being made (or about to be made) into the said
offence (or suspected offence);
This is to authorise and require you to search for the said..............................................(the
thing specified) in the..............................................(describe the house or place or part thereof
to which the search is to be confined), and, if found, to produce the same forthwith before
this Court, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under
it, immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 12
WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT
(See section 97)
To..............................................
(name and designation of the police officer above the rank of a constable).
WHEREAS information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry thereupon had, I
have been led to believe that the..............................................(describe the house or other
place) is used as a place for the deposit (or sale) of stolen property (or if for either of the
other purposes expressed in the section, state the purpose in the words of the section);
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house (or other place) with such
assistance as shall be required, and to use, if necessary, reasonable force for that purpose,
and to search every part of the said house (or other place, or if the search is to be confined
to a part, specify the part clearly), and to seize and take possession of any property (or
documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or obscene objects, as the case may be) (add,
when the case requires it) and also of any instruments and materials which you may reasonably
believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit stamps, or false
seals, or counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes (as the case may be), and forthwith
to bring before this Court such of the said things as may be taken possession of, returning
this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon
its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 13
BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See sections 125 and 126)
WHEREAS I,.................................................................(name), inhabitant of
..............................................(place), have been called upon to enter into a bond to keep the
peace for the term of..............................................or until the completion of the inquiry in the
matter of..............................................now pending in the Court of.............................................., I
hereby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any act that may probably
occasion a breach of the peace, during the said term or until the completion of the said
inquiry and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit, to Government,
the sum of rupees.............................................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 14
BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See sections 127, 128 and 129)
WHEREAS I,......................................................................(name), inhabitant
of..............................................(place), have been called upon to enter into a bond to be of
good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India for the term of
..............................................(state the period) or until the completion of the inquiry in the
matter of .............................................. now pending in the Court of ..............................................,
I hereby bind myself to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India
during the said term or until the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of my making
default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees...................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
(Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add)
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named........................................that
he will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term
or until the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of his making default therein, we bind
ourselves, jointly and severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees................................
.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 15
SUMMONS ON INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE
(See section 132)
To..............................................of..............................................
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me by credible information that................................
(state the substance of the information), and that you are likely to commit a breach of the
peace (or by which act a breach of the peace will probably be occasioned), you are hereby
required to attend in person (or by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate
of..............................................on the ..............................................day of
..............................................20..........., at ten o'clock in the forenoon, to show cause why you
should not be required to enter into a bond for rupees..............................................[when sureties
are required, add, and also to give security by the bond of one (or two, as the case may be)
surety (or sureties) in the sum of rupees..............................................(each if more than one)],
that you will keep the peace for the term of..............................................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ........... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 16
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 141)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name and address) appeared before me in person
(or by his authorised agent) on the..............................................day of..............................................
in obedience to a summons calling upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a
bond for rupees..............................................with one surety (or a bond with two sureties each
in rupees..............................................), that he, the said..............................................(name) would
keep the peace for the period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the
said..............................................(name) to enter into and find such security.........................................
(state the security ordered when it differs from that mentioned in the summons), and he has
failed to comply with the said order;
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said..............................................(name)
into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail
for the said period of..............................................(term of imprisonment) unless he shall in
the meantime be lawfully ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ........... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 17
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 141)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that ..............................................
(name and description) has been concealing his presence within the district of
.............................................. and that there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view
to committing a cognizable offence;
or
WHEREAS evidence of the general character of..............................................(name
and description) has been adduced before me and recorded, from which it appears that he is
an habitual robber (or house-breaker, etc., as the case may be);
AND WHEREAS an order has been recorded stating the same and requiring the said
(name) to furnish security for his good behaviour for the term of (state the period) by
entering into a bond with one surety (or two or more sureties, as the case may be), himself for
rupees.............................................. and the said surety (or each of the said sureties)
rupees ..............................................and the said..............................................(name) has failed to
comply with the said order and for such default has been adjudged imprisonment for (state
the term) unless the said security be sooner furnished;
This is to authorise and require you receive the said..............................................( name)
into your custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep in the Jail, or if he is
already in prison, be detained therein, for the said period of (term of imprisonment) unless he
shall in the meantime be lawfully ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ........... .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 18
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY
(See sections 141 and 142)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................(or other officer in whose
custody the person is).
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description of prisoner) was committed
to your custody under warrant of the Court, dated the..............................................
day of ..............................................20..............................................; and has since duly given
security under section .............................................. of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023.
or
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description of prisoner) was committed
to your custody under warrant of the Court, dated the.........................................................
day of ..............................................20.................; and there have appeared to me sufficient
grounds for the opinion that he can be released without hazard to the community;
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said
.............................................. (name) from your custody unless he is liable to be detained for
some other cause.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 19
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE
(See section 144)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name, description and address) has
been proved before me to be possessed of sufficient means to maintain his wife
..............................................(name) [or his child..............................................(name) or his father
or mother..............................................(name), who is by reason of (state the reason) unable to
maintain herself (or himself)] and to have neglected (or refused) to do so, and an order has
been duly made requiring the said......................................................( name) to allow to his said
..............................................wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly
sum of rupees..............................................; and whereas it has been further proved that the
said..............................................(name) in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay
rupees.............................................., being the amount of the allowance for the month (or months)
of..............................................;
And thereupon an order was made adjudging him to undergo imprisonment in the said
Jail for the period of..............................................;
This is to authorise and require you receive the said..............................................(name)
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and there carry the said order
into execution according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the
manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 20
WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE
(See section 144)
To.............................................................................................................................................. ..........
(name and designation of the police officer or other person to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS an order has been duly made requiring..............................................(name) to
allow to his said wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of
rupees.............................................., and whereas the said..............................................(name) in
wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees.............................................., being
the amount of the allowance for the month (or months) of..............................................
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property belonging
to the said..............................................(name) which may be found within the district
of.............................................., and if within..............................................(state the number of days
or hours allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith), to
sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the
said sum, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under
it, immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 21
ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES
(See section 152)
To..............................................(name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an
obstruction (or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway (or other public place) which,
etc., (describe the road or public place) ........................................................... by, etc.,
..............................................(state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance), and
that such obstruction (or nuisance) still exists;
or
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying on, as owner, or
manager, the trade or occupation of ..............................................(state the particular trade or
occupation and the place where it is carried on), and that the same is injurious to the public
health (or comfort) by reason..............................................(state briefly in what manner the
injurious effects are caused), and should be suppressed or removed to different place;
or
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner (or are in possession
of or have the control over) a certain tank (or well or excavation) adjacent to the public way
..............................................(describe the thoroughfare), and that the safety of the public is
endangered by reason of the said tank (or well or excavation) being without a fence
(or insecurely fenced);
or
WHEREAS , etc., etc., (as the case may be);
I do hereby direct and require you within..............................................(state the time
allowed) (state what is required to be done to abate the nuisance) .............................................
or to appear at..............................................in the ............................................. Court
of..............................................on
the
..............................................day
of..............................................next, and to show cause why this order should not be enforced;
or
I do hereby direct and require you within..............................................(state the time
allowed) to cease carrying on the said trade or occupation at the said place, and not again to
carry on the same, or to remove the said trade from the place where it is now carried on, or to
appear, etc.;
or
I do hereby direct and require you within..............................................(state the time
allowed) to put up a sufficient fence (state the kind of fence and the part to be fenced); or to
appear, etc.;
or
I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc. (as the case may be).
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 22
MAGISTRATE'S NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER
(See section 160)
To..............................................(name, description and address).
I HEREBY give you notice that it has been found that the order issued on the
..............................................day of..............................................requiring you
..............................................(state substantially the requisition in the order) is reasonable
and proper. Such order has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey
the said order within (state the time allowed), on peril of the penalty provided by the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 for disobedience thereto.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 23
INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY
(See section 161)
To..............................................(name, description and address).
WHEREAS the inquiry into the conditional order issued by me on
the..............................................day of .............................................., 20..............................................,
is pending, and it has been made to appear to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said
order is attended with such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to
render necessary immediate measures to prevent such danger or injury, I do hereby, under
the provisions of section 161 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, direct and
enjoin you forthwith to .............................................. (state plainly what is required to be done
as a temporary safeguard), pending the result of the inquiry.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 24
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER PROHIBITING THE REPETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE
(See section 162)
To..............................................(name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that, etc. ..............................................(state
the proper recital, guided by Form No. 21 or Form No. 25, as the case may be);
I do hereby strictly order and enjoin you not to repeat or continue, the said nuisance.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 25
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC.
(See section 163)
To..............................................(name, description and address).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are in possession (or have the
management) of ..............................................(describe clearly the property), and that, in digging
a drain on the said land, you are about to throw or place a portion of the earth and stones
dug-up upon the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of obstruction to persons
using the road;
or
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of other persons
(mention the class of persons) are about to meet and proceed in a procession along the
public street, etc., (as the case may be) and that such procession is likely to lead to a riot or
an affray;
or
WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be);
I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any of the earth or stones
dug from land on any part of the said road;
or
I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the said street, and strictly
warn and enjoin you not to take any part in such procession (or as the case recited may
require).
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 26
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER DECLARING PARTY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC., IN
DISPUTE
(See section 164)
It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute, likely to induce a breach
of the peace, existed between..............................................(describe the parties by name and
residence or residence only if the dispute be between bodies of villagers) concerning
certain..............................................(state concisely the subject of dispute), situate within my
local jurisdiction, all the said parties were called upon to give in a written statement of their
respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said..............................................(the
subject of dispute), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon, without reference to
the merits of the claim of either of the said parties to the legal right of possession, that the
claim of actual possession by the said..............................................(name or names or
description) is true; I do decide and declare that he is (or they are) in possession of the
said..............................................(the subject of dispute) and entitled to retain such possession
until ousted by due course of law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance of his (or their)
possession in the meantime.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 27
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION OF
LAND, ETC.
(See section 165)
To the officer in charge of the police station at..............................................
(or, To the Collector of..............................................).
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to induce a breach of
the peace, existed between..............................................(describe the parties concerned by
name and residence, or residence only if the dispute be between bodies of villagers)
concerning certain..............................................(state concisely the subject of dispute)
situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and the said parties were thereupon duly called
upon to state in writing their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said
..............................................(the subject of dispute), and whereas, upon due inquiry into the
said claims, I have decided that neither of the said parties was in possession of the
said..............................................(the subject of dispute) (or I am unable to satisfy myself as to
which of the said parties was in possession as aforesaid);
This is to authorise and require you to attach the said..............................................(the
subject of dispute) by taking and keeping possession thereof, and to hold the same under
attachment until the decree or order of a competent Court determining the rights of the
parties, or the claim to possession, shall have been obtained, and to return this warrant with
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 28
MAGISTRATE'S ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER
(See section 166)
A dispute having arisen concerning the right of use of..............................................(state
concisely the subject of dispute) situate within my local jurisdiction, the possession of which
land (or water) is claimed exclusively by..............................................(describe the person or
persons), and it appears to me, on due inquiry into the same, that the said land (or water) has
been open to the enjoyment of such use by the public (or if by an individual or a class of
persons, describe him or them) and (if the use can be enjoyed throughout the year) that the
said use has been enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said inquiry (or if the
use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say, "during the last of the seasons at which the
same is capable of being enjoyed");
I do order that the said..............................................(the claimant or claimants of
possession) or any one in their interest, shall not take (or retain) possession of the said land
(or water) to the exclusion of the enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he (or they)
shall obtain the decree or order of a competent Court adjudging him (or them) to be entitled
to exclusive possession.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 29
BOND AND BAIL-BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER
(See section 189)
I,..............................................(name), of.............................................., being charged with
the offence of.............................................., and after inquiry required to appear before the
Magistrate of..............................................
or
and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to appear when
required, do hereby bind myself to appear at.............................................., in the Court
of........................................., on the..............................................day of..............................................next
(or on such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further to the said charge,
and in case of my making default herein. I bind myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of
rupees..............................................;
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us)
surety (or sureties) for the above said .............................................. (name) that he shall attend
at..............................................in the Court of.............................................., on
the..............................................day of..............................................next (or on such day as he
may hereafter be required to attend), further to answer to the charge pending against him,
and, in case of his making default therein, I hereby bind myself (or we hereby bind ourselves)
to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees.....................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 30
BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVIDENCE
(See section 190)
I,..............................................(name) of ............................................. (place), do hereby bind
myself to attend at.................................................in the Court of....................................................
at..............................................o'clock on the..............................................day
of..............................................next and then and there to prosecute (or to prosecute and give
evidence) (or to give evidence) in the matter of a charge of..............................................against
one A. B., and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the
sum of rupees..................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 31
SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE
(See section 229)
To, .......................................................................................................
(Name of the accused)
of..............................................(address)
WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer a charge of a petty offence
..............................................(state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to
appear in person (or by an advocate) before..............................................(Magistrate)
of..............................................on the..............................................day of..............................................
20.............................................., or if you desire to plead guilty to the charge without appearing
before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date the plea of guilty in writing and
the sum of ............................ rupees as fine, or if you desire to appear by an advocate and to
plead guilty through such an advocate, to authorise such advocate in writing to make such
a plea of guilty on your behalf and to pay the fine through such advocate. Herein fail not.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
(Note.—The amount of fine specified in this summons shall not exceed five thousand rupees.)
————

FORM No. 32
NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
(See section 232)
The Magistrate of..............................................hereby gives notice that he has committed
one..............................................for trial at the next Sessions; and the Magistrate hereby instructs
the Public Prosecutor to conduct the prosecution of the said case.
The charge against the accused is that,.............................................. etc. (state the offence
as in the charge)
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 33
CHARGES
(See sections 234, 235 and 236)
I. CHARGES WITH ONE-HEAD
(1)(a) I,..............................................(name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby charge
you..............................................(name of accused person) as follows:—
(b) On section 147.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., waged war against the Government
of India and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 147 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of this Court.
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the said charge.
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate)
[To be substituted for (b)]:—
(2)On section 151.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., with the intention of inducing the
President of India [or, as the case may be, the Governor of ..............................................(name
of State)] to refrain from exercising a lawful power as such President (or, as the case may be,
the Government) assaulted President (or, as the case may be, the Governor), and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 151 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
and within the cognizance of this Court.
(3)On section 198.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., did (or omitted to do, as the case
may be) ............................................. , such conduct being contrary to the provisions
of..............................................Act .............................................., section..............................................,
and known by you to be prejudicial to.............................................., and thereby committed an
offence punishable under section 198 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the
cognizance of this Court.
(4)On section 229.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., in the course of the trial of
..............................................before.............................................., stated in evidence that
“..............................................” which statement you either knew or believed to be false, or did
not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 229 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court.
(5)On section 105.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., committed culpable homicide not
amounting to murder, causing the death of.............................................., and thereby committed
an offence punishable under section 105 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within
the cognizance of this Court.
(6)On section 108.—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of......................................................, at.......................................................,
abetted the commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of intoxication, and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 108 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
and within the cognizance of this Court.
(7)On section 117(2).—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., voluntarily caused grievous hurt
to..................................., and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 117(2)
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court.

(8)On section 309(2).—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., robbed..............................................
(state the name), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 309(2) of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court.
(9)On section 310(2).—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., committed dacoity, an offence
punishable under section 310(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the
cognizance of this Court.
II. CHARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS
(1)(a) I,..............................................(name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby charge
you..............................................(name of accused person) as follows:—
(b) On section 179.—First—That you, on or about the..............................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., knowing a coin to be counterfeit,
delivered the same to another person, by name, A. B., as genuine, and thereby committed an
offence punishable under section 179 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the
cognizance of the Court of Session.
Secondly—That you, on or about the...............................................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., knowing a coin to be counterfeit
attempted to induce another person, by name, A.B., to receive it as genuine, and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 179 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said charge.
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate)
[To be substituted for (b)]:—
(2)On sections 103 and 105.—First—That you, on or about the.....................................
day of.............................................., at.............................................., committed murder by causing
the death of.............................................., and thereby committed an offence punishable under
section 103 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of
Session.
Secondly—That you, on or about the......................................day of........................................,
at.............................................., by causing the death of.............................................., committed
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 105 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the
Court of Session.
(3)On sections 303(2) and 307.—First—That you, on or about the.....................................
day of................................, at......, committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 303(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the
Court of Session.
Secondly—That you, on or about the...............................................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., committed theft, having made
preparation for causing death to a person in order to the committing of such theft, and
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 307 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
Thirdly—That you, on or about the........................................................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., committed theft, having made
preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to the effecting of your escape after the

committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 307 of
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
Fourthly—That you, on or about the.................................................................day
of.............................................., at.............................................., committed theft, having made
preparation for causing fear of hurt to a person in order to the restraining of property taken
by such theft and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 307 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(4)Alternative charge on section 229.—That you, on or about the......................................
day of......................................., at......................................., in the course of the inquiry
into.............................................., before.............................................., stated in evidence that
‘‘..............................................’’, and that you, on or about the..............................................day of
.............................................., at.............................................., in the course of the trial of,
....................................... before, stated in the evidence that ‘‘..............................................’’, one
of which statements you either knew or believed to be false, did not believe to be
true, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 229 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session.
(In cases tried by Magistrates substitute ‘‘within my cognizance’’ for ‘‘within the cognizance
of the Court of Session’’.)
III. CHARGES FOR THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION
I,..................................................(name and office of Magistrate, etc.) hereby charge you
..............................................(name of accused person) as follows:—
That you, on or about the..............................................day of..............................................,
at.............................................., committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable
under section 303(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the
Court of Session (or Magistrate, as the case may be).
And you, the said ................................................................(name of accused), stand further
charged that you, before the committing of the said offence, that is to say, on
the...................................................... day of.............................................., had been convicted by
the..................................................(state Court by which conviction was had)
at..............................................of an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to say, the offence of
house-breaking by night..............................................(describe the offence in the words used
in the section under which the accused was convicted), which conviction is still in full force
and effect, and that you are thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 13 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc.
————

FORM No. 34
SUMMONS TO WITNESS
(See sections 63 and 267)
To..............................................of..............................................
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that..............................................(name of
the accused) of
..............................................(address) has (or is suspected to have)
committed the offence of..............................................(state the offence concisely with time
and place), and it appears to me that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce
any document or other thing for the prosecution.
You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the..............................................
day of..............................................next at ten o'clock in the forenoon, to produce such document
or thing or to testify what you know concerning the matter of the said complaint, and not to
depart thence without leave of the Court; and you are hereby warned that, if you shall
without just excuse neglect or refuse to appear on the said date, a warrant will be issued to
compel your attendance.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 35
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR
FINE IF PASSED BY A COURT
(See sections 258, 271 and 278)
To the Officer in charge of Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS on the..............................................day of ..............................................,
..............................................(name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be)
prisoner in case No. ..............................................of the Calendar for 20 ........... ,
was convicted before me..............................................(name and official designation) of the
offence of..............................................(mention the offence or offences concisely) under section
(or sections) .............................................. of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (or
of..............................................Act ...........), and was sentenced to..............................................(state
the punishment fully and distinctly).
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said..............................................
(prisoner's name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby
carry the aforesaid sentence into execution according to law.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 36
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENSATION
(See section 273)
To the Officer in charge of Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description) has brought
against..............................................(name and description of the accused person) the complaint
that..............................................(mention it concisely) and the same has been dismissed on
the ground that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation against the
said..............................................( name) and the order of dismissal awards payment by the
said..............................................(name of complainant) of the sum of
rupees..............................................as compensation; and whereas the said sum has not been
paid and an order has been made for his simple imprisonment in Jail for the period
of..............................................days, unless the aforesaid sum be sooner paid;
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said..............................................(name)
into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the
said period of .......................................................................(term of imprisonment), subject to
the provisions of section 8(6)(b) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, unless the said sum
be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this
warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 37
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO
CHARGE OF OFFENCE
(See section 302)
To the Officer in charge of Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS the attendance of..............................................(name of prisoner) at present
confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is required in this Court to answer to a
charge of..............................................(state shortly the offence charged) or for the purpose of
a proceeding..............................................(state shortly the particulars of the proceeding).
You are hereby required to produce the said..............................................under safe and
sure conduct before this Court at..............................................on the..............................................day
of.............................................., 20......... , by..............................................A. M. there to answer to
the said charge, or for the purpose of the said proceeding, and after this Court has dispensed
with his further attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to
the said prison.
And you are further required to inform the said..............................................of the contents
of this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
Countersigned.
(Seal)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 38
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE
(See section 302)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS complaint has been made before this Court that..............................................
(name of the accused) of has committed the offence of..............................................(state offence
concisely with time and place) and it appears that..............................................(name of prisoner)
at present confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is likely to give material evidence
for the prosecution/defence.
You are hereby required to produce the said..............................................under safe and
sure conduct before this Court at..............................................on the..............................................day
of.............................................., 20............, by A. M. there to give evidence in the matter now
pending before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance,
cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison.
And you are further required to inform the said..............................................of the contents
of this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
Countersigned.
(Seal)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 39
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT IN CERTAIN CASES OF CONTEMPT WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED
(See section 384)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS at a Court held before me on this day..............................................(name and
description of the offender) in the presence (or view) of the Court committed wilful contempt.
And whereas for such contempt the said..............................................(name of the offender)
has been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees.............................................., or in
default to suffer simple imprisonment for the period of..............................................(state the
number of months or days).
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said..............................................(name
of the offender) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the
said Jail for the said period of..............................................(term of imprisonment), unless the
said fine be sooner paid; and, on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning
this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 40
MAGISTRATE'S OR JUDGE'S WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS REFUSING TO ANSWER OR
TO PRODUCE DOCUMENT
(See section 388)
To..............................................
(name and designation of officer of Court)
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description), being summoned (or
brought before this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an inquiry
into an alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question (or certain questions) put to him
touching the said alleged offence, and duly recorded, or having been called upon to produce
any document has refused to produce such document, without alleging any just excuse for
such refusal, and for his refusal has been ordered to be detained in custody
for..............................................(term of detention adjudged);
This is to authorise and require you to take the said..............................................(name)
into custody, and him safely to keep in your custody for the period
of..............................................days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to be examined
and to answer the questions asked of him, or to produce the document called for from him,
and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such consent being known, to bring him
before this Court to be dealt with according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement
certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 41
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH
(See section 407)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS at the session held before me on the..............................................day
of.............................................., 20..............................................,..............................................(name
of prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be), prisoner in case No. ................. of the
Calendar for 20.............. at the said Session, was duly convicted of the offence of culpable
homicide amounting to murder under section ..............................................of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and sentenced to death, subject to the confirmation of the said sentence
by the..............................................Court of........................................................................
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said..............................................
(prisoner's name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and him there
safely to keep until you shall receive the further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into
effect the order of the said .......................................................................Court.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 42
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE
(See sections 427, 453 and 456)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS at a Session held on the................................................................day
of.............................................., 20.......... , ..............................................(name of the prisoner), the
(1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be), prisoner in case No. ............ of the Calendar for 20.......... ,
at the said Session, was convicted of the offence of.............................................. , punishable
under section..............................................of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and was
sentenced to..................... and thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the
order of the .............................................. Court of ............................................. order of
the .............................................(a duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punishment
adjudged by the said sentence has been commuted to the punishment of imprisonment for
life;
This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said..............................................
(prisoner's name) in your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he shall be
delivered over by you to the proper authority and custody for the purpose of his undergoing
the punishment of imprisonment for life under the said order,
or
if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words "custody in the said
Jail", "and there to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the said order
according to law".
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 43
WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH
(See sections 453 and 454)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the
case may be) prisoner in case No. ............ of the Calendar for 20............ at the Session held
before me on the..............................................day of .............................................., 20 .............. ,
has been by a warrant of the Court, dated the.................... day of .............................................. ,
committed to your custody under sentence of death; .............................................. and whereas
the order of the High Court at ..............................................confirming the said sentence has
been received by this Court.
This is to authorise and require you to carry the said sentence into execution by
causing the said..............................................to be hanged by the neck until he be dead,
at..............................................(time and place of execution), and to return this warrant to the
Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has been executed.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 44
WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE
(See section 461)
To..............................................
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are
to execute the warrant).
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description of the offender) was on
the..............................................day of.............................................., 20......... , convicted before
me of the offence of..............................................(mention the offence concisely), and sentenced
to pay a fine of rupees..............................................; and whereas the
said..............................................(name), although required to pay the said fine, has not paid
the same or any part thereof;
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the
said ..............................................(name), which may be found within the district
of..............................................; and, if within..............................................(state the number of
days or hours allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith),
to sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the
said fine, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under
it, immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............. .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 45
WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE
(See section 461)
To the Collector of the district of..............................................
WHEREAS.............................................. (name, address and description of the offender)
was on the..............................................day of.............................................., 20.......... , convicted
before me of the offence of..............................................(mention the offence concisely), and
sentenced to pay a fine of rupees..............................................; and
WHEREAS the said..............................................(name), although require to pay the said
fine, has not paid the same or any part of thereof;
You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of the said fine as
arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the
said..............................................(name) and to certify without delay what you have done in
pursuance of this order.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 46
BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALISATION OF FINE
[See section 464 (1) (b)]
WHEREAS I,..............................................(name) inhabitant of..............................................
(place), have been sentenced to pay a fine of rupees..............................................and in default
of payment thereof to undergo imprisonment for..............................................; and whereas the
Court has been pleased to order my release on condition of my executing a bond for my
appearance on the following date (or dates), namely:—
I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of..............................................
at.............................................. o'clock on the following date (or dates), namely:—
and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of
rupees..............................................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD—
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that he will appear
before the Court of ..............................................on the following date (or dates), namely:—
And, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves jointly and severally to
forfeit to Government the sum of rupees...............................................
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 47
BOND AND BAIL-BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLICE STATION OR
COURT
[See sections 478, 479, 480, 481, 482(3) and 485]
I,..............................................(name), of..............................................(place), having been
arrested or detained without warrant by the Officer in charge of..............................................police
station (or having been brought before the Court of..............................................), charged
with the offence of.............................................., and required to give security for my attendance
before such Officer of Court on condition that I shall attend such Officer or Court on every
day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to such charge, and in case of my
making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees.............................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Signature)
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us)
surety (or sureties) for the above said..............................................(name) that he shall attend
the Officer in charge of..............................................police station or the Court
of..............................................on every day on which any investigation into the charge is
made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, and appear, before such Officer or
Court for the purpose of such investigation or to answer the charge against him (as the case
may be), and, in case of his making default herein, I hereby bind myself (or we, hereby bind
ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees...............................
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 48
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY
(See section 487)
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at..............................................
(or other officer in whose custody the person is)
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description of prisoner) was committed
to your custody under warrant of this Court, dated the..............................................day
of.............................................. , and has since with his surety (or sureties) duly executed a
bond under section 485 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said.......................................
(name) from your custody, unless he is liable to be detained for some other matter.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 49
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO ENFORCE A BOND
(See section 491)
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name, description and address of person) has
failed to appear on..............................................(mention the occasion) pursuant to his
recognizance, and has by default forfeited to Government the sum of
rupees..............................................(the penalty in the bond); and whereas the
said..............................................(name of person) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the
said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him;
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said
..............................................(name) that you may find within the district of ............................... ,
by seizure and detention, and, if the said amount be not paid within......................................... ,
days to sell the property so attached or so much of it as may be sufficient to realise the
amount aforesaid, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately
upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 50
NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND
(See section 491)
To .............................................. of ..............................................
WHEREAS on the..............................................day of.............................................. ,
20 ........................., you became surety for..............................................(name)
of..............................................(place) that he should appear before this Court on
the..............................................day of ..............................................and bound yourself in default
thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees..................to Government; and whereas the
said..............................................(name) has failed to appear before this Court and by reason of
such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum of rupees.
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause,
within..............................................days from this date, why payment of the said sum should
not be enforced against you.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 51
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 491)
To.............................................. of..............................................
WHEREAS on the..............................................day of ............................ , 20................... , you
became surety by a bond for..............................................(name) of..............................................
(place) that he would be of good behaviour for the period of..............................................and
bound yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees.................... to Government; and
whereas the said..............................................(name) has been convicted of the offence
of.............................................. (mention the offence concisely) committed since you became
such surety, whereby your security bond has become forfeited;
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees .................... or to show cause
within .............................................. days why it should not be paid.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 52
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY
(See section 491)
To..............................................of..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name, description and address) has bound himself
as surety for the appearance of .............................................. (mention the condition of the
bond) and the said .............................................. (name) has made default, and thereby forfeited
to Government the sum of rupees ........................ (the penalty in the bond);
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said
..............................................(name) which you may find within .............................................. the
district of .............................................. , by seizure and detention; and, if the said amount be
not paid within days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient
to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what you have done under this warrant
immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 53
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL
(See section 491)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description of surety) has bound himself
as a surety for the appearance of.............................................. (state the condition of the bond)
and the said..............................................(name) has therein made default whereby the penalty
mentioned in the said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the
said..............................................(name of surety) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the
said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him, and
the same cannot be recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, and an order
has been made for his imprisonment in the Civil Jail for..................................(Specify the period);
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or Keeper) to receive the
said..............................................(name) into your custody with the warrant and to keep him
safely in the said Jail for the said..............................................(term of imprisonment), and to
return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 54
NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 491)
To..............................................(name, description and address)
WHEREAS on the..............................................day of.............................................., 20................,
you entered into a bond not to commit, etc., ..............................................(as in the bond), and
proof of the forfeiture of the same has been given before me and duly recorded;
You are hereby called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees.................... or to show
cause before me within..............................................days why payment of the same should not
be enforced against you.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 55
WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP
THE PEACE
(See section 491)
To..............................................
(name and designation of police officer), at the police station of..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name and description) did, on
the..............................................day of.............................................., 20........................ , enter into a
bond for the sum of rupees..............................................binding himself not to commit a breach
of the peace, etc., (as in the bond), and proof of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given
before me and duly recorded; and whereas notice has been given to the said
..............................................(name) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum should
not be paid, and he has failed to do so or to pay the said sum;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging
to the said..............................................(name) to the value of rupees.............. , which you may
find within the district of.............................................., and, if the said sum be not paid
within.............................................. , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the same; and to make return of what you have done under this warrant
immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 56
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE
(See section 491)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS proof has been given before me and duly recorded that................................
(name and description) has committed a breach of the bond entered into by him to keep the
peace, whereby he has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees.................. ; and whereas
the said..............................................(name) has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause
why the said sum should not be paid, although duly called upon to do so, and payment
thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an order has been
made for the imprisonment of the said..............................................(name) in the Civil Jail of the
period of..............................................(term of imprisonment);
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or Keeper) of the said
Civil Jail to receive the said..............................................(name) into your custody, together
with this warrant, and to keep his safely in the said Jail for the said period of
..............................................(term of imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

FORM No. 57
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 491)
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at..............................................
WHEREAS ..............................................(name, description and address) did, on
the..............................................day of.............................................., 20.................., give security
by bond in the sum of rupees................... for the good behaviour
of..............................................(name, etc., of the principal), and proof has been given before
me and duly recorded of the commission by the said..............................................(name) of the
offence of ..............................................whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and whereas
notice has been given to the said..............................................(name) calling upon him to show
cause why the said sum should not be paid, and he has failed to do so to pay the said sum;
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging
to the said..............................................(name) to the value of rupees......................which you
may find within the district of.............................................. , and, if the said sum be not paid
within.............................................. , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be
sufficient to realise the same, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant
immediately upon its execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
————

SEC. 1]
—————
DIWAKAR SINGH,
Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel to the Govt. of India.
MGIPMRND—532GI(S3)—25-12-2023.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
FORM No. 58
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
(See section 491)
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at..............................................
WHEREAS..............................................(name, description and address) did, on
the .............................................. day of.............................................., 20.................. , give security
by bond in the sum of rupees........................for the good behaviour of...................................(name,
etc., of the principal), and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given before me and
duly recorded, whereby the said..............................................(name) has forfeited to Government
the sum of rupees.................. , and whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show
cause why the said sum should not be paid although duly called upon to do so, and payment
thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an order has been
made for the imprisonment of the said..............................................(name) in the Civil Jail for
the period of..............................................(term of imprisonment);
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent (or Keeper), to receive the
said..............................................(name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to
keep him safely in the said Jail for the said period of..............................................(term of
imprisonment), returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its
execution.
Dated, this.............................................. day of.............................................. , 20 ............ .
(Seal of the Court)
(Signature)
Kshitiz
Mohan
Digitally signed by Kshitiz Mohan
DN: c=IN, st=Delhi,
2.5.4.20=e8b886a9336825f4d863142c634f2f25e2e76d2f0b5f069af1775fa98f7ccdab,
postalCode=110002, street=Minto Road New Delhi,
pseudonym=5c90ab0ba7a48905de2428b65504151c,
serialNumber=0a5dc5b84f902a7bf2d6ed41c0c26429a0d4d5848dd23eb18886abaee
a31b247, ou=Deputy Manager, o=Government of India Press, cn=Kshitiz Mohan
Date: 2023.12.25 21:48:28 +05'30'

--- END BNSS ---

--- START BSA ---
THE BHARATIYASAKSHYAADHINIYAM, 2023
NO. 47 OF 2023
[25th December, 2023.]
An Act to consolidateand to provide for generalrules and principlesofevidence
for fair trial.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
PART I
CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) ThisAct maybe called the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
(2) It applies toall judicial proceedings in or before anyCourt, includingCourts-martial,
but not toaffidavits presented to anyCourt or officer, nor to proceedings before an arbitrator.
Short title,
application and
commencement.

 

No. 55]

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
25th December, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25122023-250882

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Adhiniyam, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except
arbitrators, legally authorised to take evidence;
(b) "conclusive proof" means when one fact is declared by this Adhiniyam to
be conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the
other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving
it;
(c) "disproved" in relation to a fact, means when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence
so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case,
to act upon the supposition that it does not exist;
(d) "document" means any matter expressed or described or otherwise recorded
upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks or any other means or by
more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for the
purpose of recording that matter and includes electronic and digital records.
Illustrations.
(i)A writing is a document.
(ii) Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents.
(iii) A map or plan is a document.
(iv) An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document.
(v) Acaricature is a document.
(vi)An electronic record on emails, server logs, documents on computers, laptop
or smartphone, messages, websites, locational evidence and voice mail messages
stored on digital devices are documents;
(e) "evidence" means and includes—
(i) all statements including statements given electronically which the
Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses in relation to matters
of fact under inquiry and such statements are called oral evidence;
(ii) all documents including electronic or digital records produced for the
inspection of the Court and such documents are called documentary evidence;
(f) "fact" means and includes—
(i) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being
perceived by the senses;
(ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Illustrations.
(i) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is
a fact.
(ii) That a person heard or saw something, is a fact.
(iii) That a person said certain words, is a fact.
Definitions.

(iv) That a person holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good
faith, or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a
specified time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact;
(g) "facts in issue" means and includes any fact from which, either by itself or
in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any
right, liability or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily
follows.
Explanation.—Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being
in force relating to civil procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be
asserted or denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations.
A is accused of the murder of B. At his trial, the following facts may be in issue:—
(i)
That A caused B's death.
(ii) That A intended to cause B's death.
(iii) That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B.
(iv) ThatA, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was, by reason
of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature;
(h) "may presume".—Whenever it is provided by thisAdhiniyam that the Court
may presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved or may call for proof of it;
(i) "not proved".—A fact is said to be not proved when it is neither proved nor
disproved;
(j) "proved".—A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable
that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon
the supposition that it exists;
(k) "relevant".—A fact is said to be relevant to another when it is connected
with the other in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Adhiniyam
relating to the relevancy of facts;
(l) "shall presume".—Whenever it is directed by this Adhiniyam that the
Court shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Information
Technology Act, 2000, the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the said Act and
Sanhitas.
PART II
CHAPTER II
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
3. Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence
of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and
of no others.
Explanation.—This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact
which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force
relating to civil procedure.
Evidence may
be given of
facts in issue
and relevant
facts.
21 of 2000.

Illustrations.
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of
causing his death.
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:—
A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first
hearing of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce
the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in
accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Closely connected facts
4. Facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue or a
relevant fact as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at
the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A
or B or the bystanders at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the
transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the Government of India by taking part in an
armed insurrection in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked and jails are broken
open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general transaction,
though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters
between the parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of
the correspondence in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain
the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The
goods were delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a
relevant fact.
5. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant
facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under which they happened,
or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, shortly before the robbery,
B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that he showed it, or mentioned the fact
that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B. Marks on the ground, produced by a
struggle at or near the place where the murder was committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whetherApoisoned B. The state of B's health before the symptoms
ascribed to poison, and habits of B, known to A, which afforded an opportunity for the
administration of poison, are relevant facts.
6. (1) Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any
fact in issue or relevant fact.
Relevancy of
facts forming
part of same
transaction.
Facts which are
occasion, cause
or
effect
of
facts in issue or
relevant facts.
Motive,
preparation
and previous
or subsequent
conduct.
5 of 1908.

(2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding,
in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant
thereto, and the conduct of any person, an offence against whom is the subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or
relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1.—The word "conduct" in this section does not include statements,
unless those statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this
explanation is not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other section of this
Adhiniyam.
Explanation 2.—When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to
him or in his presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) Ais tried for the murder of B. The facts thatAmurdered C, that B knew thatAhad
murdered C, and that B had tried to extort money fromAby threatening to make his knowledge
public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the
bond. The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required money for
a particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison. The fact that, before the death of B, A
procured poison similar to that which was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A. The facts that, not
long before, the date of the alleged will,Amade inquiry into matters to which the provisions
of the alleged will relate; that he consulted advocates in reference to making the will, and
that he caused drafts of other wills to be prepared, of which he did not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, either before, or at the time of, or after the
alleged crime, A provided evidence which would tend to give to the facts of the case an
appearance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or concealed evidence, or prevented
the presence or procured the absence of persons who might have been witnesses, or
suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.
(f) The question is, whetherArobbed B. The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in
A's presence—"the police are coming to look for the person who robbed B", and that
immediately afterwardsAran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B ten thousand rupees. The facts that A asked
C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A's presence and hearing—"I advise you not
to trust A, for he owes B ten thousand rupees", and that A went away without making any
answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The fact that A absconded, after
receiving a letter, warning A that inquiry was being made for the criminal, and the contents
of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime,
A absconded, or was in possession of property or the proceeds of property acquired by the
crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or might have been used in committing it,
are relevant.
(j) The question is, whetherAwas raped. The fact that, shortly after the alleged rape,
A made a complaint relating to the crime, the circumstances under which, and the terms in
which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that, without making a complaint, A
said that A had been raped is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be
relevant as a dying declaration under clause (a) of section 26, or as corroborative evidence
under section 160.

(k) The question is, whether A was robbed. The fact that, soon after the alleged
robbery,Amade a complaint relating to the offence, the circumstances under which, and the
terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that A said he had been
robbed, without making any complaint, is not relevant, as conduct under this section,
though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under clause (a) of section 26, or as
corroborative evidence under section 160.
7. Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or a relevant fact, or which
establish the identity of anything, or person whose identity, is relevant, or fix the time or
place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of
parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary
for that purpose.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A. The state of A's
property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirms that the matter
alleged to be libellous is true. The position and relations of the parties at the time when the
libel was published may be relevant facts as introductory to the facts in issue. The particulars
of a dispute betweenAand B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel are irrelevant,
though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations between
A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime. The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A
absconded from his house, is relevant under section 6, as conduct subsequent to and
affected by facts in issue. The fact that, at the time when he left home, A had sudden and
urgent business at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that
he left home suddenly. The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except
in so far as they are necessary to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on
leaving A's service, says to A—"I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer".
This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of C's conduct, which is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it
to A's wife. B says as he delivers it—"A says you are to hide this". B's statement is relevant
as explanatory of a fact which is part of the transaction.
(f)Ais tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of
the mob are relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
8. Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have
conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or
written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after the time
when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the
existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party
to it.
Illustration.
Reasonable ground exists for believing thatAhas joined in a conspiracy to wage war
against the State.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected
money in Kolkata for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Mumbai,
E published writings advocating the object in view atAgra, and F transmitted from Delhi to
Facts
necessary to
explain or
introduce fact
in issue or
relevant facts.
Things said or
done by
conspirator in
reference to
common
design.

G at Singapore the money which C had collected at Kolkata, and the contents of a letter
written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the
existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A's complicity in it, although he may have been
ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were done were strangers
to him, and although they may have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he
left it.
9. Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant—
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or
non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Chennai on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Ladakh is relevant. The fact that, near the time
when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place where it was
committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he
committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The circumstances are such
that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which
shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else, and that it was not
committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.
10. In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to
determine the amount of damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.
11. Where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following
facts are relevant—
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created,
claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its
existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised
or exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on
A's ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A's father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by
A's father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in whichA's father exercised
the right, or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A's neighbours, are relevant
facts.
12. Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge,
good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or goodwill towards any particular person, or
showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence
of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1.—A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind
must show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular
matter in question.
Explanation 2.—But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the
previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this
section, the previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.
When facts
not otherwise
relevant
become
relevant.
Facts tending
to enable Court
to
determine
amount
are
relevant in suits
for damages.
Facts relevant
when right or
custom is in
question.
Facts showing
existence of
state of mind,
or of body or
bodily feeling.

Illustrations.
(a)Ais accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that
he was in possession of a particular stolen article. The fact that, at the same time, he was in
possession of many other stolen articles is relevant, as tending to show that he knew each
and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit currency
which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit. The fact that, at the time
of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces of counterfeit currency is
relevant. The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as
genuine a counterfeit currency knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c)Asues B for damage done by a dog of B's, which B knew to be ferocious. The fact
that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made complaints to B, are
relevant.
(d) The question is, whetherA, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name
of the payee was fictitious. The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same
manner before they could have been transmitted to him by the payee if the payee had been
a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the
reputation of B. The fact of previous publications byArespecting B, showing ill-will on the
part of A towards B is relevant, as proving A's intention to harm B's reputation by the
particular publication in question. The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A
and B, and thatArepeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing
that A did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B,
being induced to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss. The fact that, at the time when
A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by
persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in good
faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner,
by the order of C, a contractor. A's defence is that B's contract was with C. The fact that A
paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving thatAdid, in good faith, make over to
C the management of the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract with B on
C's own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found,
and the question is whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real
owner could not be found. The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been
given in the place where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe
that the real owner of the property could not be found. The fact that A knew, or had reason
to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the
property and wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant, as showing that the fact that A
knew of the notice did not disprove A's good faith.
(i)A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A's intent,
the fact of A's having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously
sent by A to B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the alleged cruelty are
relevant facts.
(l) The question is, whether A's death was caused by poison. Statements made by A
during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.

(m) The question is, what was the state ofA's health at the time when an assurance on
his life was effected. Statements made byAas to the state of his health at or near the time in
question are relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a car for hire not reasonably fit for
use, wherebyAwas injured. The fact that B's attention was drawn on other occasions to the
defect of that particular car is relevant. The fact that B was habitually negligent about the
cars which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o)Ais tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.The fact thatAon
other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot B. The fact that A
was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime. The fact that he said something indicating an intention to
commit that particular crime is relevant. The fact that he said something indicating a general
disposition to commit crimes of that class is irrelevant.
13. When there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done
with a particular knowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of
similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is
insured. The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in
each of which a fire occurred, and after each of which fires A received payment from a
different insurance company, are relevant, as tending to show that the fires were not
accidental.
(b)Ais employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It isA's duty to make entries
in a book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a
particular occasion he received less than he really did receive. The question is, whether this
false entry was accidental or intentional. The facts that other entries made by A in the same
book are false, and that the false entry is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit currency. The question
is, whether the delivery of the currency was accidental. The facts that, soon before or soon
after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit currency to C, D and E are relevant, as
showing that the delivery to B was not accidental.
14. When there is a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any
course of business, according to which it naturally would have been done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched. The facts that it was
the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post,
and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was posted
in due course, and was not returned through the Return Letter Office, are relevant.
Admissions
15. An admission is a statement, oral or documentary or contained in electronic form,
which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by
any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
16. (1) Statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such
party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly
authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
Facts bearing
on question
whether act
was accidental
or intentional.
Existence of
course of
business when
relevant.
Admission
defined.
Admission by
party to
proceeding or
his agent.

(2) Statements made by—
(i) parties to suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not admissions,
unless they were made while the party making them held that character; or
(ii) (a) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject
matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so
interested; or
(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the
subject matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons
making the statements.
17. Statements made by persons whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove
as against any party to the suit, are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as
against such persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by or against
them, and if they are made whilst the person making them occupies such position or is
subject to such liability.
Illustration.
Aundertakes to collect rents for B. B suesAfor not collecting rent due from C to B.A
denies that rent was due from C to B.Astatement by C that he owed B rent is an admission,
and is a relevant fact as against A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.
18. Statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred
for information in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B—"Go and ask C, C knows all about it". C's statement is an admission.
19. Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes
them, or his representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the
person who makes them or by his representative in interest, except in the following cases,
namely:—
(1) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as
between third persons under section 26;
(2) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it consists of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in
issue, made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is
accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(3) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is
relevant otherwise than as an admission.
Illustrations.
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A
affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged. A may prove a statement by B that the deed is
genuine, and B may prove a statement by A that deed is forged; but A cannot prove a
statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by himself that
the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away. Evidence is given to show
that the ship was taken out of her proper course. A produces a book kept by him in the
ordinary course of his business showing observations alleged to have been taken by him
Admissions by
persons whose
position must
be proved as
against party
to suit.
Admissions by
persons
expressly
referred to by
party to suit.
Proof of
admissions
against persons
making them,
and by or on
their behalf.

from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may
prove these statements, because they would be admissible between third parties, if he were
dead, under clause (b) of section 26.
(c)Ais accused of a crime committed by him at Kolkata. He produces a letter written
by himself and dated at Chennai on that day, and bearing the Chennai post-mark of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be
admissible under clause (b) of section 26.
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. He offers to
prove that he refused to sell them below their value.A may prove these statements, though
they are admissions, because they are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit currency which
he knew to be counterfeit. He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the
currency as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that person did examine it
and told him it was genuine. A may prove these facts.
20. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant, unless and
until the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence
of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter contained, or unless the
genuineness of a document produced is in question.
21. In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition
that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer
that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation.—Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any advocate from
giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 132.
22. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if
the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat, coercion or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person,
proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the
accused person grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by
making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to
the proceedings against him:
Provided that if the confession is made after the impression caused by any such
inducement, threat, coercion or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed,
it is relevant:
Provided further that if such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become
irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a
deception practised on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was
drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered,
whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he
was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.
23. (1) No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a person
accused of any offence.
(2) No confession made by any person while he is in the custody of a police officer,
unless it is made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate shall be proved against him:
When oral
admissions as
to contents of
documents are
relevant.
Admissions in
civil cases
when relevant.
Confession
caused by
inducement,
threat,
coercion or
promise, when
irrelevant in
criminal
proceeding.
Confession to
police officer.

Provided that when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information
received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much
of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the
fact discovered, may be proved.
24. When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons
is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other
person as well as against the person who makes such confession.
Explanation I.—"Offence", as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or
attempt to commit, the offence.
Explanation II.—A trial of more persons than one held in the absence of the accused
who has absconded or who fails to comply with a proclamation issued under section 84 of
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be a joint trial for the
purpose of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said—"B and I
murdered C". The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b)Ais on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered
by A and B, and that B said—"A and I murdered C". This statement may not be taken into
consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being jointly tried.
25. Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted but they may operate
as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.
Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses
26. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or
who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances
of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following
cases, namely:—
(a) when the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as
to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in
which the cause of that person's death comes into question. Such statements are
relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they
were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question;
(b) when the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course of
business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him
in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional
duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed by him of the receipt of money,
goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce written
or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or
signed by him;
(c) when the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the
person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to
a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages;
(d) when the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence
of any public right or custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence of
which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement
was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter had arisen;
Consideration
of proved
confession
affecting
person making
it and others
jointly under
trial for same
offence.
Admissions
not conclusive
proof, but
may estop.
Cases in which
statement of
relevant fact
by person who
is dead or
cannot be
found, etc., is
relevant.

(e) when the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood, marriage or
adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and
when the statement was made before the question in dispute was raised;
(f) when the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed
relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which
such statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the
question in dispute was raised;
(g) when the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which
relates to any such transaction as is specified in clause (a) of section 11;
(h) when the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed
feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or A dies of injuries received in a
transaction in the course of which she was raped. The question is whether she was raped
by B; or the question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit
would lie against B byA's widow. Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death,
referring respectively to the murder, the rape and the actionable wrong under consideration,
are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A's birth. An entry in the diary of a deceased
surgeon regularly kept in the course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended
A's mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether Awas in Nagpur on a given day. Astatement in the diary
of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business, that on a given day the
solicitor attendedAat a place mentioned, in Nagpur, for the purpose of conferring with him
upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Mumbai harbour on a given day. A
letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's firm by which she was chartered to their
correspondents in Chennai, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed
on a given day from Mumbai port, is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land. A letter from A's
deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on A's account and held it at A's
orders is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whetherAand B were legally married. The statement of a deceased
clergyman that he married them under such circumstances that the celebration would be a
crime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a
certain day. The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship. A protest made by the
captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way.Astatement byA, a deceased
headman of the village, that the road was public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased business person in the ordinary course of his
business, is a relevant fact.

(k) The question is, whetherA, who is dead, was the father of B.Astatement byAthat
B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A. A letter from A's deceased
father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married. An entry in a
memorandum book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter's marriage with A on a
given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window.
The question is as to the similarity of the caricature and its libellous character. The remarks
of a crowd of spectators on these points may be proved.
27. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person
authorised by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which
it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence,
or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without
an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court
considers unreasonable:
Provided that the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in
interest; that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to
cross-examine and the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the
second proceeding.
Explanation.—A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between
the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.
Statements made under special circumstances
28. Entries in the books of account, including those maintained in an electronic form,
regularly kept in the course of business are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into
which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence
to charge any person with liability.
Illustration.
A sues B for one thousand rupees, and shows entries in his account books showing
B to be indebted to him to this amount. The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient,
without other evidence, to prove the debt.
29. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record or an electronic
record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge
of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by
the law of the country in which such book, register or record or an electronic record, is kept,
is itself a relevant fact.
30. Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts
generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of the Central
Government or any State Government, as to matters usually represented or stated in such
maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.
31. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public
nature, any statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Central Act or State Act or in
a Central Government or State Government notification appearing in the respective Official
Gazette or in any printed paper or in electronic or digital form purporting to be such Gazette,
is a relevant fact.
Relevancy of
certain
evidence for
proving, in
subsequent
proceeding,
truth of facts
therein stated.
Entries in
books of
account when
relevant.
Relevancy of
entry in public
record or an
electronic
record made in
performance
of duty.
Relevancy of
statements in
maps, charts
and plans.
Relevancy of
statement as
to fact of
public nature
contained in
certain Acts or
notifications.

32. When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement
of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published including in electronic
or digital form under the authority of the Government of such country and to contain any
such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such country contained in a book
including in electronic or digital form purporting to be a report of such rulings, is relevant.
How much of a statement is to be proved
33. When any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement,
or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a document which
forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a connected series of
letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the statement,
conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the Court
considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect
of the statement, and of the circumstances under which it was made.
Judgments of Courts when relevant
34. The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any Court
from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is
whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.
35. (1) A final judgment, order or decree of a competent Court or Tribunal, in the
exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon
or takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to be
entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any
specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character,
or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.
(2) Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof that—
(i) any legal character, which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
(ii) any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled,
accrued to that person at the time when such judgment, order or decree declares it to
have accrued to that person;
(iii) any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the
time from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it had ceased or should
cease; and
(iv) anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property
of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declares that it
had been or should be his property.
36. Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 35 are relevant
if they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments,
orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.
Illustration.
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way over
the land, which A denies. The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by
A against C for a trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same
right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
Relevancy of
statements as
to any law
contained in
law books
including
electronic or
digital form.
What evidence
to be given
when statement
forms part of a
conversation,
document,
electronic
record, book or
series of letters
or papers.
Previous
judgments
relevant to bar
a second suit
or trial.
Relevancy of
certain
judgments in
probate, etc.,
jurisdiction.
Relevancy and
effect of
judgments,
orders or
decrees, other
than those
mentioned in
section 35.

37. Judgments or orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 34, 35
and 36, are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in
issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this Adhiniyam.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them. C in each
case says that the matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances are such that
it is probably true in each case, or in neither.Aobtains a decree against C for damages on the
ground that C failed to make out his justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted. A afterwards sues C
for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and C, the
judgment against B is irrelevant.
(c) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B's son, murders
A in consequence. The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(d) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The
previous conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) Ais tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecutedAfor libel and thatAwas
convicted and sentenced is relevant under section 6 as showing the motive for the fact in
issue.
38. Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or
decree which is relevant under section 34, 35 or 36, and which has been proved by the
adverse party, was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by
fraud or collusion.
Opinions of third persons when relevant
39. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of
science or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the
opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or
any other field, or in questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions are
relevant facts and such persons are called experts.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinions of
experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died,
are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what
was either wrong or contrary to law. The opinions of experts upon the question whether the
symptoms exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and whether such
unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts
which they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are
relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written byA.Another document
is produced which is proved or admitted to have been written byA. The opinions of experts
Judgments,
etc., other
than those
mentioned in
sections 34, 35
and 36 when
relevant.
Fraud or
collusion in
obtaining
judgment, or
incompetency
of Court, may
be proved.
Opinions of
experts.

on the question whether the two documents were written by the same person or by different
persons, are relevant.
(2) When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to
any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of
the Information Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence
shall be an expert.
40. Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent
with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other
persons, who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts
affirm or deny to be the symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain
sea-wall. The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there
were no such sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
41. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom any document
was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the
person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not written or
signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another
person when he has seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting
to be written by that person in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority
and addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course of business, documents
purporting to be written by that person have been habitually submitted to him.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a given letter is in the handwriting of A, a merchant in
Itanagar. B is a merchant in Bengaluru, who has written letters addressed toAand received
letters purporting to be written by him. C, is B's clerk whose duty it was to examine and file
B's correspondence. D is B's broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting
to be written by A for the purpose of advising him thereon. The opinions of B, C and D on
the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A are relevant, though neither B, C
nor D ever sawAwrite.
(2) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any
person, the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the Electronic Signature
Certificate is a relevant fact.
42. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom
or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom or right, of persons who would be
likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.—The expression "general custom or right" includes customs or rights
common to any considerable class of persons.
Illustration.
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is
a general right within the meaning of this section.
43. When the Court has to form an opinion as to—
(i) the usages and tenets of any body of men or family;
Facts bearing
upon opinions
of experts.
Opinion as to
handwriting
and signature,
when relevant.
Opinion as to
existence of
general custom
or right, when
relevant.
Opinion as to
usages, tenets,
etc., when
relevant.
21 of 2000.

(ii) the constitution and governance of any religious or charitable
foundation; or
(iii) the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular
classes of people,
the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
44. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to
another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, of any
person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the
subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings
under the Divorce Act, 1869, or in prosecution under sections 82 and 84 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married. The fact that they were usually
received and treated by their friends as husband and wife, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whetherAwas the legitimate son of B. The fact thatAwas always
treated as such by members of the family, is relevant.
45. Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on which
such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration.
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of
forming his opinion.
Character when relevant
46. In civil cases the fact that the character of any person concerned is such as to
render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him, is irrelevant, except in so far as
such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
47. In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is of a good character, is
relevant.
48. In a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66,
section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76,
section 77 or section 78 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or for attempt to commit any
such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the
victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant
on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent.
49. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the accused has a bad character, is irrelevant,
unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in which case it becomes
relevant.
Explanation 1.—This section does not apply to cases in which the bad character of
any person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.—A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.
Opinion on
relationship,
when relevant.
Grounds of
opinion, when
relevant.
In civil cases
character to
prove conduct
imputed,
irrelevant.
In criminal
cases previous
good character
relevant.
Evidence of
character or
previous sexual
experience not
relevant in
certain cases.
Previous bad
character not
relevant,
except in reply.
4 of 1869.

50. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the
amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation.—In this section and sections 46, 47 and 49, the word "character"
includes both reputation and disposition; but, except as provided in section 49, evidence
may be given only of general reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts
by which reputation or disposition has been shown.
PART III
ON PROOF
CHAPTER III
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
51. No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved.
52. (1) The Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts, namely:—
(a) all laws in force in the territory of India including laws having extra-territorial
operation;
(b) international treaty, agreement or convention with country or countries by
India, or decisions made by India at international associations or other bodies;
(c) the course of proceeding of the ConstituentAssembly of India, of Parliament
of India and of the State Legislatures;
(d) the seals of all Courts and Tribunals;
(e) the seals of Courts ofAdmiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction, Notaries Public,
and all seals which any person is authorised to use by the Constitution, or by an Act
of Parliament or State Legislatures, or Regulations having the force of law in India;
(f) the accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons
filling for the time being any public office in any State, if the fact of their appointment
to such office is notified in any Official Gazette;
(g) the existence, title and national flag of every country or sovereign recognised
by the Government of India;
(h) the divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world, and public
festivals, fasts and holidays notified in the Official Gazette;
(i) the territory of India;
(j) the commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between the
Government of India and any other country or body of persons;
(k) the names of the members and officers of the Court and of their deputies and
subordinate officers and assistants, and also of all officers acting in execution of its
process, and of advocates and other persons authorised by law to appear or act
before it;
(l) the rule of the road on land or at sea.
(2) In the cases referred to in sub-section (1) and also on all matters of public history,
literature, science or art, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents
of reference and if the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact,
it may refuse to do so unless and until such person produces any such book or document
as it may consider necessary to enable it to do so.
Character as
affecting
damages.
Fact judicially
noticeable
need not be
proved.
Facts of which
Court shall
take judicial
notice.

53. No fact needs to be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their
agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by
any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved
otherwise than by such admissions.
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
54. All facts, except the contents of documents may be proved by oral evidence.
55. Oral evidence shall, in all cases whatever, be direct; if it refers to,—
(i) a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
saw it;
(ii) a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says
he heard it;
(iii) a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner,
it must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that
manner;
(iv) an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for
sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production
of such treatises if the author is dead or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving
evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense which the
Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any
material thing other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of
such material thing for its inspection.
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
56. The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary
evidence.
57. Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the
Court.
Explanation 1.—Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary
evidence of the document.
Explanation 2.—Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart
being executed by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as
against the parties executing it.
Explanation 3.—Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process,
as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the
contents of the rest; but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are not
primary evidence of the contents of the original.
Facts admitted
need not be
proved.
Proof of facts
by oral
evidence.
Oral evidence
to be direct.
Proof of
contents of
documents.
Primary
evidence.

Explanation 4.—Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, and such
storage occurs simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, each such file is primary
evidence.
Explanation 5.—Where an electronic or digital record is produced from proper
custody, such electronic and digital record is primary evidence unless it is disputed.
Explanation 6.—Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in electronic
form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, each of the stored recordings is
primary evidence.
Explanation 7.—Where an electronic or digital record is stored in multiple storage
spaces in a computer resource, each such automated storage, including temporary files, is
primary evidence.
Illustration.
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at
one time from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of
any other, but no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
58. Secondary evidence includes—
(i) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(ii) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves
ensure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(iii) copies made from or compared with the original;
(iv) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute
them;
(v) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has
himself seen it;
(vi) oral admissions;
(vii) written admissions;
(viii) evidence of a person who has examined a document, the original of which
consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot conveniently be
examined in Court, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
Illustrations.
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the
two have not been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary
evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying
machine was made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original, is
secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the
original, although the copy from which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account
of a photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
59. Documents shall be proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter
mentioned.
Secondary
evidence.
Proof of
documents by
primary
evidence.

60. Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a
document in the following cases, namely: —
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power—
(i) of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved; or
(ii) of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the
Court; or
(iii) of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 64 such person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved
to be admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his
representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering
evidence of its contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default
or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;
(f) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this
Adhiniyam, or by any other law in force in India to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which
cannot conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general
result of the whole collection.
Explanation.—For the purposes of—
(i) clauses (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the
document is admissible;
(ii) clause (b), the written admission is admissible;
(iii) clause (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible;
(iv) clause (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents
by any person who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such
document.
61. Nothing in thisAdhiniyam shall apply to deny the admissibility of an electronic
or digital record in the evidence on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record and
such record shall, subject to section 63, have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability
as other document.
62. The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the
provisions of section 63.
63. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information
contained in an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in
optical or magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or
any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic form
(hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if
the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and
Cases in which
secondary
evidence
relating to
documents may
be given.
Electronic or
digital record.
Special
provisions as to
evidence
relating to
electronic
record.
Admissibility
of electronic
records.

computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or
production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated
therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall
be the following, namely:—
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the
computer or communication device during the period over which the computer or
communication device was used regularly to create, store or process information
for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period by the
person having lawful control over the use of the computer or communication
device;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic
record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly
fed into the computer or communication device
in the ordinary course of the said
activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer or
communication device was operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any
period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation during that
part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the
accuracy of its contents; and
(d)
the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is
derived from such information fed into the computer or communication device in the
ordinary course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing information
for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in
clause (a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by means of one or more computers or
communication device, whether—
(a) in standalone mode; or
(b) on a computer system; or
(c) on a computer network; or
(d) on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing information
processing and storage; or
(e) through an intermediary,
all the computers or communication devices used for that purpose during that period shall
be treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer or communication
device; and references in this section to a computer or communication device shall be
construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of
this section, a certificate doing any of the following things shall be submitted along with the
electronic record at each instance where it is being submitted for admission, namely:—
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing
the manner in which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that
electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic
record was produced by a computer or a communication device referred to in clauses (a)
to (e) of sub-section (3);
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in
sub-section (2) relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the computer or communication
device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) and an expert
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this
sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and
belief of the person stating it in the certificate specified in the Schedule.

(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer or communication
device if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied
directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment;
(b) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer or
communication device whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without
human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment or by other electronic
means as referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (3).
64. Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred to in clause (a) of
section 60, shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence
has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his
advocate or representative, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no
notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the
circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit
to dispense with it:—
(a) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(b) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will
be required to produce it;
(c) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession
of the original by fraud or force;
(d) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(e) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(f) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not
subject to, the process of the Court.
65. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by
any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be
in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
66. Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of
any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that such
electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.
67. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence
until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution,
if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable of
giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with
the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, unless its execution by the person by
whom it purports to have been executed is specifically denied.
68. If no such attesting witness can be found, it must be proved that the attestation
of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person
executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.
Rules as to
notice to
produce.
Proof of
signature and
handwriting of
person alleged
to have signed
or written
document
produced.
Proof as to
electronic
signature.
Proof of
execution of
document
required by law
to be attested.
Proof where
no attesting
witness found.
16 of 1908.

69. The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself
shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document required by
law to be attested.
70. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document,
its execution may be proved by other evidence.
71. An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it
was unattested.
72. (1) In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person
by whom it purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted
or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may
be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that signature, writing or seal has
not been produced or proved for any other purpose.
(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for
the purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any
words or figures alleged to have been written by such person.
(3) This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions.
73. In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it
purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct—
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the
Digital Signature Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate and verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that
person.
Public documents
74. (1) The following documents are public documents:—
(a) documents forming the acts, or records of the acts—
(i) of the sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of India or of a
foreign country;
(b) public records kept in any State or Union territory of private documents.
(2) All other documents except the documents referred to in sub-section (1) are
private.
75. Every public officer having the custody of a public document, which any person
has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the legal
fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy
of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever
such officer is authorised by law to make use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be
called certified copies.
Admission of
execution by
party to
attested
document.
Proof when
attesting
witness denies
execution.
Proof of
document not
required by law
to be attested.
Comparison
of signature,
writing or seal
with others
admitted or
proved.
Proof as to
verification of
digital
signature.
Public and
private
documents.
Certified
copies of
public
documents.

Explanation.—Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorised
to deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the
meaning of this section.
76. Such certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public
documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.
77. The following public documents may be proved as follows:—
(a)Acts, orders or notifications of the Central Government in any of its Ministries
and Departments or of any State Government or any Department of any State
Government or Union territoryAdministration—
(i) by the records of the Departments, certified by the head of those
Departments respectively; or
(ii) by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such
Government;
(b) the proceedings of Parliament or a State Legislature, by the journals of those
bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be
printed by order of the Government concerned;
(c) proclamations, orders or Regulations issued by the President of India or the
Governor of a State or theAdministrator or Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory,
by copies or extracts contained in the Official Gazette;
(d) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign
country, by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country
as such, or by a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a
recognition thereof in any Central Act;
(e) the proceedings of a municipal or local body in a State, by a copy of such
proceedings, certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to
be published by the authority of such body;
(f) public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original or
by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a
Notary Public, or of an Indian Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer having the legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the
character of the document according to the law of the foreign country.
Presumptions as to documents
78. (1) The Court shall presume to be genuine every document purporting to be a
certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared to be admissible as
evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly certified by any officer of the
Central Government or of a State Government:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed
in the manner directed by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document
purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he
claims in such paper.
79. Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record
or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a
judicial proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take such evidence or to be a
statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with law,
Proof of
documents by
production of
certified
copies.
Proof of other
official
documents.
Presumption
as to
genuineness of
certified
copies.
Presumption as
to documents
produced as
record of
evidence, etc.

and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid,
the Court shall presume that—
(i) the document is genuine;
(ii) any statements as to the circumstances under which it was taken, purporting
to be made by the person signing it, are true; and
(iii) such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
80. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be
the Official Gazette, or to be a newspaper or journal, and of every document purporting to be
a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept
substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 92, document is said to
be in proper custody if it is in the place in which, and looked after by the person with whom
such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had
a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render that
origin probable.
81. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic or digital record
purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be electronic or digital record directed
by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic or digital record is kept substantially
in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 93 electronic records are
said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and looked after by the person
with whom such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to
render that origin probable.
82. The Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority
of the Central Government or any State Government were so made, and are accurate; but
maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.
83. The Court shall presume the genuineness of, every book purporting to be printed
or published under the authority of the Government of any country, and to contain any of
the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the
Courts of such country.
84. The Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a
power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary Public,
or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the
Central Government, was so executed and authenticated.
85. The Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement
containing the electronic or digital signature of the parties was so concluded by affixing the
electronic or digital signature of the parties.
86. (1) In any proceeding involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume
unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been altered since the
specific point of time to which the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceeding, involving secure electronic signature, the Court shall presume
unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of
signing or approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature,
nothing in this section shall create any presumption, relating to authenticity and
integrity of the electronic record or any electronic signature.
Presumption
as to Gazettes,
newspapers,
and other
documents.
Presumption
as to Gazettes
in electronic
or digital
record.
Presumption
as to maps or
plans made by
authority of
Government.
Presumption as
to collections
of laws and
reports of
decisions.
Presumption
as to powersof-attorney.
Presumption as
to electronic
agreements.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records and
electronic
signatures.

87. The Court shall presume, unless contrary is proved, that the information listed in
an Electronic Signature Certificate is correct, except for information specified as subscriber
information which has not been verified, if the certificate was accepted by the subscriber.
88. (1) The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of
any judicial record of any country beyond India is genuine and accurate, if the document
purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any representative of the Central
Government in or for such country to be the manner commonly in use in that country for the
certification of copies of judicial records.
(2) An officer who, with respect to any territory or place outside India is a Political
Agent therefor, as defined in clause (43) of section 3 of the General ClausesAct, 1897, shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a representative of the Central Government
in and for the country comprising that territory or place.
89. The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on
matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the statements of
which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and published
by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been
written or published.
90. The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator
through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to be
addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the
Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.
91. The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after
notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.
92. Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in
the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and, in the case of
a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by
whom it purports to be executed and attested.
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 80 shall also apply to this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from
his custody deeds relating to the land showing his titles to it. The custody shall be proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The
mortgagor is in possession. The custody shall be proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's possession, which
were deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody shall be proper.
93. Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic signature of any
particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 81 shall also apply to this section.
Presumption as
to Electronic
Signature
Certificates.
Presumption
as to certified
copies of
foreign judicial
records.
Presumption
as to books,
maps and
charts.
Presumption
as to
electronic
messages.
Presumption as
to due
execution, etc.,
of documents
not produced.
Presumption
as to
documents
thirty years
old.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records five
years old.
10 of 1897.

CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL EVIDENCE BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
94. When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property,
have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is
required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof
of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter,
except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary
evidence is admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.—When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing,
and when it is shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by
which he is appointed need not be proved.
Exception 2.—Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.—This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants
or dispositions of property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which
they are contained in more documents than one.
Explanation 2.—Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be
proved.
Explanation 3.—The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the
facts referred to in this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the
same fact.
Illustrations.
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained
must be proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be
proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The
contract mentions the fact that B had paidAthe price of other indigo contracted for verbally
on another occasion. Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other
indigo. The evidence is admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment.
The evidence is admissible.
95. When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or
any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been proved
according to section 94, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted,
as between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the
purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms:
Provided that any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or
which would entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud,
intimidation, illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party,
want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or law:
Provided further that the existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on
which a document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In
considering whether or not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree
of formality of the document:
Provided also that the existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition
precedent to the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition
of property, may be proved:
Provided also that the existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind
or modify any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in
Evidence of
terms of
contracts,
grants and
other
dispositions of
property
reduced to form
of document.
Exclusion of
evidence of
oral
agreement.

cases in which such contract, grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in
writing, or has been registered according to the law in force for the time being as to the
registration of documents:
Provided also that any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned
in any contract are usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided also that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the express terms of the contract:
Provided also that any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language
of a document is related to existing facts.
Illustrations.
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods "in ships from Kolkata to
Visakhapatnam". The goods are shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The fact that
particular ship was orally excepted from the policy, cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B one thousand rupees on the
1st March, 2023. The fact that, at the same time, an oral agreement was made that the money
should not be paid till the 31st March, 2023, cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called "the Rampur tea estate" is sold by a deed which contains a map
of the property sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded
as part of the estate and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B,
upon certain terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B's as to their value.
This fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also
prays that the contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provision was
inserted in it by mistake.Amay prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle
him to have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment,
and accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were
supplied on credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these
words—"Bought ofAa horse for thirty thousand rupees". B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is written—"Rooms, ten
thousand rupees a month". A may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to
include partial board. A hires lodging of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement,
drawn up by an advocate, is made between them. It is silent on the subject of board.A may
not prove that board was included in the term verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the
receipt and does not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain
contingency. The writing is left with B who suesA upon it. A may show the circumstances
under which it was delivered.
96. When the language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective,
evidence may not be given of facts which would show its meaning or supply its defects.
Illustrations.
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for "one lakh rupees or one lakh fifty
thousand rupees". Evidence cannot be given to show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show
how they were meant to be filled.
Exclusion of
evidence to
explain or
amend
ambiguous
document.

97. When language used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately
to existing facts, evidence may not be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such
facts.
Illustration.
Asells to B, by deed, "my estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas".Ahas an
estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact
that the estate meant to be sold was one situated at a different place and of a different size.
98. When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference
to existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.
A sells to B, by deed, "my house in Kolkata". A had no house in Kolkata, but it
appears that he had a house at Howrah, of which B had been in possession since the
execution of the deed. These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the
house at Howrah.
99. When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply
to any one, and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or
things, evidence may be given of facts which show which of those persons or things it was
intended to apply to.
Illustrations.
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for one thousand rupees, "my white horse". A has two white
horses. Evidence may be given of facts which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Ramgarh. Evidence may be given of facts showing
whether Ramgarh in Rajasthan or Ramgarh in Uttarakhand was meant.
100. When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly to
another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence
may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
Illustration.
A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the occupation of Y". A has land at X, but not
in the occupation of Y, and he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence
may be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.
101. Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly
intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local and regional expressions, of
abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.
A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, "all my mods".Ahas both models and modelling tools.
Evidence may be given to show which he meant to sell.
102. Persons who are not parties to a document, or their representatives in interest,
may give evidence of any facts tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the
terms of the document.
Illustration.
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on
delivery. At the same time, they make an oral agreement that three months’ credit shall be
given to A. This could not be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it
affected his interests.
103. Nothing in this Chapter shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 as to the construction of wills.
Exclusion of
evidence
against
application of
document to
existing facts.
Evidence as to
document
unmeaning in
reference to
existing facts.
Evidence as to
application of
language which
can apply to
one only of
several persons.
Evidence as to
application of
language to one
of two sets of
facts, to
neither of
which the
whole correctly
applies.
Evidence as to
meaning of
illegible
characters,
etc.
Saving of
provisions of
Indian
Succession Act
relating to
wills.
Who may
give evidence
of agreement
varying terms
of document.
39 of 1925.

PARTIV
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTERVII
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
104. Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts must prove that those facts exist, and
when a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof
lies on that person.
Illustrations.
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A
says B has committed. A must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the
possession of B, by reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be true.Amust
prove the existence of those facts.
105. The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if
no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustrations.
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left to
Aby the will of C, B's father. If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to
retain his possession. Therefore, the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond. The execution of the bond is admitted, but B
says that it was obtained by fraud, whichAdenies. If no evidence were given on either side,
A would succeed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud is not proved. Therefore, the
burden of proof is on B.
106. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the
Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact
shall lie on any particular person.
Illustration.
A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft to
C. A must prove the admission. B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question,
he was elsewhere. He must prove it.
107. The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any
person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such
evidence.
Illustrations.
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A
must prove that the document has been lost.
108. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of
circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part
of the said Sanhita, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall
presume the absence of such circumstances.
Burden of
proof.
On whom
burden of
proof lies.
Burden of
proof as to
particular fact.
Burden of
proving fact
to be proved
to make
evidence
admissible.
Burden of
proving that
case of accused
comes within
exceptions.

Illustrations.
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not
know the nature of the act. The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was
deprived of the power of self-control. The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 117 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 provides that whoever, except in
the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes grievous hurt,
shall be subject to certain punishments.Ais charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt
under section 117. The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under
sub-section (2) of section 122 lies on A.
109. When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of
proving that fact is upon him.
Illustrations.
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character
and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving
that he had a ticket is on him.
110. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was
alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms
it.
111. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has
not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had
been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.
112. When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or
principal and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden
of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those
relationships respectively, is on the person who affirms it.
113. When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is
shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person
who affirms that he is not the owner.
114. Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties,
one of whom stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving
the good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustrations.
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought
by the client. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit
brought by the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.
Burden of
proving fact
especially
within
knowledge.
Burden of
proving death
of person
known to
have been
alive within
thirty years.
Burden of
proving that
person is alive
who has not
been heard of
for seven
years.
Burden of
proof as to
relationship in
the cases of
partners,
landlord and
tenant,
principal and
agent.
Burden of
proof as to
ownership.
Proof of good
faith in
transactions
where one
party is in
relation of
active
confidence.

115. (1) Where a person is accused of having committed any offence specified in
sub-section (2), in—
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment for the time
being in force, making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and
maintenance of public order; or
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month,
extensive disturbance of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or
explosives were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed
forces or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of
their duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such person had
committed such offence.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) an offence under section 147, section 148, section 149 or section 150 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under
section 149 or section 150 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
116. The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage
between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution,
the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of
that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other
at any time when he could have been begotten.
117. When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been
abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had
committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her
husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the Court may
presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had
been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have the same meaning
as in section 86 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
118. When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a
woman and it is shown that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected by
such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the
Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in section 80 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
119. (1) The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have
happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and
public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations.
The Court may presume that—
(a) a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon, after the theft is either the
thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for
his possession;
(b) an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material
particulars;
Presumption
as to certain
offences.
Birth during
marriage,
conclusive
proof of
legitimacy.
Presumption
as to abetment
of suicide by a
married
woman.
Presumption
as to dowry
death.
Court may
presume
existence of
certain facts.

(c) a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good
consideration;
(d) a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a
period shorter than that within which such things or state of things usually cease to
exist, is still in existence;
(e) judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be
unfavourable to the person who withholds it;
(h) if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer
by law, the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the
obligation has been discharged.
(2) The Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering
whether such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it:—
(i) as to Illustration (a)—a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after
it was stolen, and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually
receiving rupees in the course of his business;
(ii) as to Illustration (b)—A, a person of the highest character, is tried for
causing a man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a
person of equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes
precisely what was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of Aand
himself;
(iii) as to Illustration (b)—a crime is committed by several persons.A, B and C,
three of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each
gives an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other
in such a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
(iv) as to Illustration (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of
business. B, the acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's
influence;
(v) as to Illustration (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five
years ago, but it is known that there have been floods since that time which might
change its course;
(vi) as to Illustration (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question,
was performed under exceptional circumstances;
(vii) as to Illustration (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is
shown to have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by
disturbances;
(viii) as to Illustration (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would
bear on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also
injure the feelings and reputation of his family;
(ix) as to Illustration (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not
compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters
unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked;
(x) as to Illustration (i)—a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the
circumstances of the case are such that he may have stolen it.
120. In a prosecution for rape under sub-section (2) of section 64 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question
is whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such
woman states in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall
presume that she did not consent.
Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain
prosecution
for rape.

Explanation.—In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in section 63 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
CHAPTERVIII
ESTOPPEL
121. When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused
or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither
he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and
such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.
Illustration.
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and
thereby induces B to buy and pay for it. The land afterwards becomes the property of A,
and A seeks to set aside the sale on the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no title.
He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.
122. No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall,
during the continuance of the tenancy or any time thereafter, be permitted to deny that the
landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable
property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence of the
person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to such
possession at the time when such licence was given.
123. No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to
deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence commenced,
authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
Explanation 1.—The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really
drawn by the person by whom it purports to have been drawn.
Explanation 2.—If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the
bailor, he may prove that such person had a right to them as against the bailor.
CHAPTERIX
OF WITNESSES
124. All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that they
are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers
to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or
any other cause of the same kind.
Explanation.—A person of unsound mind is not incompetent to testify, unless he is
prevented by his unsoundness of mind from understanding the questions put to him and
giving rational answers to them.
125. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in
which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written
and the signs made in open Court and evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take
the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and such
statement shall be videographed.
Estoppel.
Estoppel of
tenant and of
licensee of
person in
possession.
Estoppel of
acceptor of
bill of
exchange,
bailee or
licensee.
Who may
testify.
Witness
unable to
communicate
verbally.

126. (1) In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any
party to the suit, shall be competent witnesses.
(2) In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of such person,
respectively, shall be a competent witness.
127. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some Court to
which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any question as to his own conduct in
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court
as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters which occurred in
his presence whilst he was so acting.
Illustrations.
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly
taken by B, the Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except
upon the special order of a superior Court.
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before B,
a Magistrate. B cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of the superior
Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police officer
whilst on his trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred.
128. No person who is or has been married, shall be compelled to disclose any
communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been
married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person
who made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed
against the other.
129. No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished official
records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head
of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.
130. No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications made to him in
official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the disclosure.
131. No Magistrate or police officer shall be compelled to say when he got any
information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue officer shall be compelled
to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence against the public
revenue.
Explanation.—"revenue officer" means any officer employed in or about the business
of any branch of the public revenue.
132. (1) No advocate, shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's express
consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of
his service as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client, or to state the contents or
condition of any document with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the
purpose of his professional service, or to disclose any advice given by him to his client in
the course and for the purpose of such service:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure of—
(a) any such communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(b) any fact observed by any advocate, in the course of his service as such,
showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his
service.
Competency
of husband and
wife as
witnesses in
certain cases.
Judges and
Magistrates.
Communications
during
marriage.
Evidence as to
affairs of
State.
Official
communications.
Information
as to
commission of
offences.
Professional
communications.

(2) It is immaterial whether the attention of such advocate referred to in the proviso to
sub-section (1), was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation.—The obligation stated in this section continues after the professional
service has ceased.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I have committed forgery, and I wish you to
defend me". As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I wish to obtain possession of property by
the use of a forged deed on which I request you to sue". This communication, being made
in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not protected from disclosure.
(c)A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an advocate, to defend him. In the
course of the proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A's account book,
charging A with the sum said to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at
the commencement of his professional service. This being a fact observed by B in the
course of his service, showing that a fraud has been committed since the commencement of
the proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or
employees of advocates.
133. If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he
shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in
section 132; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such advocate, as a witness,
he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he questions such advocate,
on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at liberty to disclose.
134. No one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, unless he offers himself as a
witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may
appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence which he has
given, but no others.
135. No witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his
title-deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any property as
pledgee or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate
him, unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the production
of such deeds or some person through whom he claims.
136. No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or electronic
records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if
they were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to
their production.
137. A witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter
relevant to the matter in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the
ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to
criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to expose, such
witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall
subject him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding,
except a prosecution forgiving false evidence by such answer.
Privilege not
waived by
volunteering
evidence.
Confidential
communication
with legal
advisers.
Production of
title-deeds of
witness not a
party.
Production of
documents or
electronic
records which
another
person, having
possession,
could refuse to
produce.
Witness not
excused from
answering on
ground that
answer will
criminate.

138. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person;
and a conviction is not illegal if it proceeds upon the corroborated testimony of an
accomplice.
139. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of
any fact.
CHAPTERX
OF EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
140. The order in which witnesses are produced and examined shall be regulated by
the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively,
and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
141. (1) When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask
the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if proved, would
be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved,
would be relevant, and not otherwise.
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon
proof of some other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given
of the fact first mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the
Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first
proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given
before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations.
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be
dead, which statement is relevant under section 26. The fact that the person is dead must be
proved by the person proposing to prove the statement, before evidence is given of the
statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost. The
fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy,
before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen. It is
proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property. The relevancy of the
denial depends on the identity of the property. The Court may, in its discretion, either
require the property to be identified before the denial of the possession is proved, or permit
the denial of the possession to be proved before the property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact A which is said to have been the cause or effect of a
fact in issue. There are several intermediate facts B, C and D which must be shown to exist
before the fact A can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court may
either permitAto be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D
before permitting proof of A.
142. (1) The examination of a witness by the party who calls him shall be called his
examination-in-chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his
cross-examination.
(3) The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination, by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.
Accomplice.
Number of
witnesses.
Order of
production
and
examination
of witnesses.
Judge to decide
as to
admissibility
of evidence.
Examination
of witnesses.

143. (1) Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse party so
desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
(2) The examination-in-chief and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but
the cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on
his examination-in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in
cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in
re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.
144. A person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness by the
mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is called as
a witness.
145. Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
146. (1) Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or
expects to receive, is called a leading question.
(2) Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an
examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court.
(3) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or
undisputed, or which have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
(4) Leading questions may be asked in cross-examination.
147. Any witness may be asked, while under examination, whether any contract,
grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained
in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the
adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced,
or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the witness to give
secondary evidence of it.
Explanation.—A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons
about the contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A assaulted B. C deposes that he heard A say to D—"B
wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged on him". This statement is
relevant, as showing A's motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of it, though no
other evidence is given about the letter.
148. A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question, without such writing
being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which are
to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
149. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions
hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(a) to test his veracity; or
(b) to discover who he is and what is his position in life; or
(c) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such
questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might expose or tend
directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture:
Order of
examinations.
Crossexamination
of person
called to
produce a
document.
Witnesses to
character.
Leading
questions.
Evidence as to
matters in
writing.
Crossexamination
as to previous
statements in
writing.
Questions
lawful in
crossexamination.

Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66,
section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an issue,
it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination
of the victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of such
victim with any person for proving such consent or the quality of consent.
150. If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding, the
provisions of section 137 shall apply thereto.
151. (1) If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding,
except in so far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall
decide whether or not the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit,
warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it.
(2) In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following
considerations, namely:—
(a) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the
imputation conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to
the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(b) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to
matters so remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would
not affect, or would affect in a slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the
credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(c) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the
importance of the imputation made against the witness's character and the importance
of his evidence;
(d) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness's refusal to answer, the
inference that the answer if given would be unfavourable.
152. No such question as is referred to in section 151 ought to be asked, unless the
person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys
is well-founded.
Illustrations.
(a) An advocate is instructed by another advocate that an important witness is a
dacoit. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(b)An advocate is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dacoit.
The informant, on being questioned by the advocate, gives satisfactory reasons for his
statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(c)A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he is
a dacoit. There are here no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode
of life and means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground
for asking him if he is a dacoit.
153. If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable
grounds, it may, if it was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the
High Court or other authority to which such advocate is subject in the exercise of his
profession.
When witness
to be
compelled to
answer.
Court to
decide when
question shall
be asked and
when witness
compelled to
answer.
Question not
to be asked
without
reasonable
grounds.
Procedure of
Court in case
of question
being asked
without
reasonable
grounds.

154. The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or
scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the questions
before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in
order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.
155. The Court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult
or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly offensive in
form.
156. When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant
to the inquiry only in so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be
charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any
crime and denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality,
and answers it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations.
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud. The claimant is
asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty.
He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty. The evidence
is not admissible.
(c)Aaffirms that on a certain day he saw B at Goa.Ais asked whether he himself was
not on that day at Varanasi. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show thatAwas on that day
at Varanasi. The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his
credit, but as contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Goa.
In each of these cases, the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving
false evidence.
(d)Ais asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against
whom he gives evidence. He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the
question tends to impeach his impartiality.
157. (1) The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to put
any question to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under
sub-section (1), to rely on any part of the evidence of such witness.
158. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following ways by the adverse
party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him—
(a) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of
the witness, believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(b) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a
bribe, or has received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(c) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence
which is liable to be contradicted.
Explanation.—A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may
not, upon his examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his
reasons in cross-examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted,
though, if they are false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Indecent and
scandalous
questions.
Questions
intended to
insult or
annoy.
Exclusion of
evidence to
contradict
answers to
questions
testing
veracity.
Question by
party to his
own witness.
Impeaching
credit of
witness.

Illustrations.
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that he delivered
the goods to B. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he
had not delivered goods to B. The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is accused of the murder of B. C says that B, when dying, declared that A had
given B the wound of which he died. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous
occasion, C said that B, when dying, did not declare thatAhad given B the wound of which
he died. The evidence is admissible.
159. When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any
relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or
near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of opinion that
such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration.
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes
various incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the
place where it was committed. Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to
corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.
160. In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement made by
such witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or
before any authority legally competent to investigate the fact, may be proved.
161. Whenever any statement, relevant under section 26 or 27, is proved, all matters
may be proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or
confirm the credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that
person had been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the
matter suggested.
162. (1) A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by referring to
any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned,
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time
fresh in his memory:
Provided that the witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other
person, and read by the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it, he knew it to be
correct.
(2) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he
may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided that the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the
non-production of the original:
Provided further that an expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional
treatises.
163. A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is
mentioned in section 162, although he has no specific recollection of the facts themselves,
if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
Questions
tending to
corroborate
evidence of
relevant fact,
admissible.
Former
statements of
witness may
be proved to
corroborate
later
testimony as
to same fact.
What matters
may be proved
in connection
with proved
statement
relevant under
section 26 or
27.
Refreshing
memory.
Testimony to
facts stated in
document
mentioned in
section 162.

Illustration.
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the
course of business, if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten
the particular transactions entered.
164. Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding sections
shall be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it; such party may, if he
pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
165. (1)Awitness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his possession or
power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production
or to its admissibility:
Provided that the validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court.
(2) The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of
State, or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall
be held to have committed an offence under section 198 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023:
Provided that no Court shall require any communication between the Ministers and
the President of India to be produced before it.
166. When a party calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to
produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling for its
production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so.
167. When a party refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce,
he cannot afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the other party
or the order of the Court.
Illustration.
Asues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, Acalls for the
document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks
to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given byA, or in order
to show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.
168. The Judge may, in order to discover or obtain proof of relevant facts, ask any
question he considers necessary, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties
about any fact; and may order the production of any document or thing; and neither the
parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make any objection to any such question
or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer
given in reply to any such question:
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Adhiniyam to
be relevant, and duly proved:
Provided further that this section shall not authorise any Judge to compel any witness
to answer any question, or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled
to refuse to answer or produce under sections 127 to 136, both inclusive, if the question
were asked or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask
any question which it would be improper for any other person to ask under section 151 or
152; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases
hereinbefore excepted.
Right of
adverse party
as to writing
used to refresh
memory.
Production of
documents.
Giving, as
evidence, of
document
called for and
produced on
notice.
Using, as
evidence, of
document
production of
which was
refused on
notice.
Judge's power
to put
questions or
order
production.

CHAPTERXI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
169. The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for
a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if it shall appear to the Court before which
such objection is raised that, independently of the evidence objected to and admitted, there
was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had been
received, it ought not to have varied the decision.
CHAPTERXII
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
170. (1) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, if, immediately before the date on which this
Adhiniyam comes into force, there is any application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding
or appeal pending, then, such application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or appeal
shall be dealt with under the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, as in force
immediately before such commencement, as if thisAdhiniyam had not come into force.
No new trial
for improper
admission or
rejection of
evidence.
Repeal and
savings.
1 of 1872.
1 of 1872.

THESCHEDULE
[See section 63(4)(c)]
CERTIFICATE
PART A
(To be filled by the Party)
I, (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of 
residing/employed at do hereby solemnly affirm and
sincerely state and submit as follows:—
I have produced electronic record/output of the digital record taken from the following
device/digital record source (tick mark):—
Computer / Storage Media
DVR
Mobile
Flash Drive
CD/DVD
Server
Cloud
Other
Other: 
Make & Model: Color: 
Serial Number: 
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device/digital record(specify).
The digital device or the digital record source was under the lawful control for regularly
creating, storing or processing information for the purposes of carrying out regular
activities and during this period, the computer or the communication device was working
properly and the relevant information was regularly fed into the computer during the
ordinary course of business. If the computer/digital device at any point of time was not
working properly or out of operation, then it has not affected the electronic/digital
record or its accuracy. The digital device or the source of the digital record is:—
Owned
Maintained
Managed
Operated
by me (select as applicable).
I state that the HASH value/s of the electronic/digital record/s is ,
obtained through the following algorithm:—
SHA1:
SHA256:
MD5:
Other (Legally acceptable standard)
(Hash report to be enclosed with the certificate)
(Name and signature)
Date (DD/MM/YYYY): 
Time (IST): hours (In 24 hours format)
Place: 

SEC. 1]
PART B
(To be filled bythe Expert)
I, (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of 
residing/employed at do hereby solemnly affirm and
sincerely state and submit as follows:—
The produced electronic record/output of the digital record are obtained from the following
device/digital record source (tick mark):—
Computer / Storage Media
DVR
Mobile
Flash Drive
CD/DVD
Server
Cloud
Other
Other: 
Make & Model: Color: 
Serial Number: 
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device/digital record(specify).
I state that the HASH value/s of the electronic/digital record/s is ,
obtained through the following algorithm:—
SHA1:
SHA256:
MD5:
Other (Legally acceptable standard)
(Hash report to be enclosed with the certificate)
(Name, designation and signature)
Date(DD/MM/YYYY): 
Time (IST): hours (In 24 hours format)
Place: 
—————
DIWAKAR SINGH,
Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel to the Govt. of India.
MGIPMRND—533GI(S3)—25-12-2023.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF
PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
Kshitiz
Mohan
Digitally signed by Kshitiz Mohan
DN: c=IN, st=Delhi,
2.5.4.20=e8b886a9336825f4d863142c634f2f25e2e76d2f0b5f069af
1775fa98f7ccdab, postalCode=110002, street=Minto Road New
Delhi, pseudonym=5c90ab0ba7a48905de2428b65504151c,
serialNumber=0a5dc5b84f902a7bf2d6ed41c0c26429a0d4d5848d
d23eb18886abaeea31b247, ou=Deputy Manager, o=Government
of India Press, cn=Kshitiz Mohan
Date: 2023.12.25 21:14:13 +05'30'

--- END BSA ---

--- JUDGMENT 1 ---
The respondent (defendant in the suit) and his wife are engaged in business of building materials. As per the appellant (plaintiff in the suit), the respondent approached him in February, 1995 seeking a loan for his business. The appellant advanced a loan of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs) to the respondent on the security of his properties. 5. Since the respondent could not pay Stamp Duty on the Mortgage Deed, it was agreed between the parties that the said sum be split into 2 Hereinafter abbreviated to “OSA”. 3 Hereinafter abbreviated to “CMP”.3 two registered mortgages and the balance in four promissory notes. Accordingly, the respondent executed the following: i) Mortgage Deed dated 16.03.1995 for Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh) agreeing to repay the same together with interest at 36% per annum4; ii) Mortgage Deed dated 17.04.1995 for Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand) agreeing to repay the same together with interest at 36% p.a., and; iii) Four promissory notes for the balance amount of Rs.8,50,000/- (Rupees Eight Lakhs Fifty Thousand). 6. Besides the two mortgages supra, the respondent borrowed the remaining Rs.8,50,000/- (Rupees Eight Lakhs Fifty Thousand) in four promissory notes on different dates. Since there was default in payment of interest, the appellant demanded repayment of the amount due under the four promissory notes. The respondent thereupon, in various panchayats, promised to repay the amounts. Ultimately, in the panchayat dated 24.06.2000, the respondent produced title document of his property as security towards debt under the four promissory notes, which has been noted in the Agreement dated 24.06.2000 (hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement”). This Agreement, in essence, is the root of the instant lis. 4 Hereinafter abbreviated to “p.a.”.4 7. The Agreement notes that the respondent owed a total amount of Rs.11,00,000/- (Rupees Eleven Lakhs) to the appellant and in settlement thereof, the respondent handed over the title deeds pertaining to the property situated at No.33, Avvai Thirunagar, Chennai - 600111, admeasuring 1300 square feet of land together with 700 square feet building (hereinafter referred to as the “schedule property”), which was valued at Rs.9,00,000/- (Rupees Nine Lakhs). Per the Agreement, the respondent agreed to register the Sale Deed as and when demanded. Further, for re-paying the balance sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs), it was agreed that the respondent will redeem the mortgaged property from the appellant and re-mortgage it elsewhere. 8. After the Agreement was entered into between the parties, the promissory notes were returned which were torn-out in the panchayat. Thereafter, the respondent neither executed a Sale Deed nor paid the balance sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs). As a result, the appellant-plaintiff, filed the suit before the High Court, praying for: “(I) granting a usual preliminary mortgage decree of the Schedule mentioned property against the defendant for the recovery of Rs.23,96,000/- together with interest at 36% p.a. on Rs.11,00,000/- till the date of realization; And pass a final decree thereafter for sale of the Mortgaged property; (II) for costs of this suit; and for such other equitable reliefs as may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the case and render justice.”5 (sic) 9. The Single Judge, after perusing the evidence on record and hearing the parties, passed judgment dated 01.04.2010 holding that the respondent-defendant had agreed to “create equitable mortgage by depositing the title deeds”. Finding thus, the Single Judge decreed the suit. Aggrieved, the respondent filed an intra-court appeal being OSA No.189 of 2011 along with Miscellaneous Petition5 No.1 of 2011, which was an application seeking condonation of delay of 176 days. The appellant through his advocate, Mr. V. Manohar received notice and filed a counter-affidavit opposing the said condonation of delay application. On 18.04.2011, the Division Bench was pleased to condone the delay, subject to payment of cost of Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand) to the appellant. 10. The Division Bench vide the First Impugned Order allowed the appeal, holding that the appellant had failed to prove that there was a mortgage executed by the respondent. It is to be noted that none appeared for the appellant in the appeal. Subsequently, the appellant filed CMP No.10107 of 2017 in OSA No.189 of 2011, praying therein to “set aside” the First Impugned Order and for restoration of the main appeal for fresh hearing. The appellant contended that his erstwhile counsel (Mr. V. Manohar) was authorized only to appear in the MP filed 5 Hereinafter abbreviated to “MP”.6 to condone the delay [MP No.1 of 2011] and that there was no notice issued to him after registering of the appeal. The Division Bench vide the Second Impugned Order dismissed the CMP. SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANT-PLAINTIFF: 11. At the outset, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court gravely erred in holding that the plaint averments were not sufficient to conclude that there was a valid mortgage entitling him to sue for a mortgage decree. It was submitted that the plaint, read as a whole, alongwith the Agreement, the Proof Affidavits and evidence of PW-1/appellant and DW1/respondent clearly evince the fact that a loan was secured by the respondent by mortgaging the schedule property. The amount in the Agreement pertains to loan transactions for which the mortgage was created by the Respondent. It was submitted that in such circumstances, the findings in the First Impugned Order are highly erroneous. 12. It was submitted by learned counsel that the Single Judge has rightly arrived at the conclusion that the present case is one where the respondent agreed to create a mortgage by depositing the title deed. There was an actionable debt and the respondent had fully intended that the deed ought to be the security for the debt. The Single Judge had also noted that the respondent in his evidence as DW1, had agreed to7 deposit the title deed to create an “equitable mortgage” for the loan amount obtained by him from the appellant. Thus, the Single Judge had rightly decreed the appellant's suit and passed preliminary decree of mortgage. 13. It was further submitted that the Division Bench in the First Impugned Order had erred in holding that there was no stipulation to pay interest in the Agreement and that therefore the rate of interest as granted by the Single Judge could not have been so granted. It was submitted that various loans were advanced by the appellant to the respondent categorically stipulating interest at the rate of 36% p.a. on repayment. Once this contractual rate of interest was agreed upon by the parties, there was no scope for the Division Bench to state that there was no stipulation to pay interest in the Agreement. The Agreement had to be read in conjunction with various promissory notes and documents evidencing the mortgage and repayment of the loan with interest. Learned counsel contended that the Division Bench erred in holding that there was no prayer for grant of a personal decree against the respondent. It was submitted that the prayer clause of the plaint would show to the contrary. 14. On the Second Impugned Order, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Division Bench went wrong in not appreciating that8 the appellant had never authorized his counsel to represent him in the OSA and his vakalatnama was confined to the MP filed by the respondent seeking condonation of delay of 176 days. The MP was allowed by the Division Bench vide order dated 18.04.2011. Thereafter, the appellant, claims learned counsel, was not served with any notice in the OSA. The appellant submits that he was neither informed by his counsel, Mr. V. Manohar or by the Registry of the High Court about the status of the appeal. 15. It was further submitted that the Division Bench gravely erred in holding that the vakalatnama was given to Mr. V. Manohar for appearing in the MP for condonation of delay, the main appeal as also this Court. It was submitted that Mr.

--- JUDGMENT 2 ---
V. Manohar, counsel, was practicing only in the High Court. There was no question of the appellant authorizing any counsel for taking up the case in this Court as and when a case would come up. It was urged that a blanket printed statement on a vakalatnama can never constitute the intention of a litigant authorizing his/her/their counsel to represent the litigant in question in all courts and all proceedings. 16. Learned counsel contended that the appellant’s advocate Mr. Sukumar, who was appearing for the appellant in the Court at Tiruvannamalai, called the appellant and informed him that a judgment9 showing the appellant’s name was published in one of the law reports under the citation 2017 (3) MLJ 521 and it also showed that he went unrepresented therein. The appellant categorically submits that it was only then that the appellant came to know that the OSA arising from the suit had been decided against him ex-parte. Prayer was made to allow the appeals. SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENT-DEFENDANT: 17. Per contra, learned senior counsel for the respondent submitted that there is no merit in the present appeals and the impugned orders do not call for any interference by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India (hereinafter referred to as the “Constitution”). It was submitted that the Agreement does not refer to any mortgage having been created, since the recitals therein make it clear that the Agreement was to sell the schedule property to the appellant, and for the said purpose alone, the title deed of the property was handed over to the appellant. It was submitted that when the very genesis of the suit is the Agreement and the Agreement per se does not disclose the creation of any mortgage, a suit for foreclosure cannot be maintained and the Division Bench had rightly held so. The findings in the First Impugned Order that no mortgage has been created, stands justified in view of the contents of the Agreement.10 18. Next, it was advanced that the plaint claims that Rs.23,96,000/- (Rupees Twenty Three Lakhs Ninety Six Thousand) was due as per the Agreement by including interest @ 36% p.a. till the date of institution of the suit. It was submitted that no particulars have been set forth in the plaint as to how this amount of Rs.23,96,000/- (Rupees Twenty Three Lakhs Ninety Six Thousand) was arrived at. While the cause of action pleaded in the suit makes reference only to the Agreement, the appellant makes a claim in respect of the mortgages dated 16.03.1995 and 17.04.1995, while also reserving the right to take separate action. Thus, it was submitted that the appellant has not put forth any specific case but has attempted to intermingle the mortgages and/or promissory notes with the Agreement. It was submitted that the mortgages dated 16.03.1995 and 17.04.1995 as also the promissory notes have been merged to arrive at the figure of Rs.11,00,000/- (Rupees Eleven Lakhs), which is being claimed as due from the respondent. It was further submitted that the promissory notes have not been exhibited in the suit. 19. Learned Senior counsel also pointed out that in respect of the two mortgages dated 16.03.1995 and 17.04.1995, the High Court in Second Appeal6 No.1235 of 2014 (which emanated from a suit for redemption filed by the respondent) passed an interim order dated 25.08.2022, directing the respondent to pay the appellant a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- 6 Hereinafter abbreviated to “SA”.11 (Rupees Ten Lakhs), being the principal and interest on both the mortgages. Subsequently, the High Court, by way of its final order dated 24.01.2023 in the said SA, noted the payments made by the respondent to the appellant, the return of the original Mortgage Deeds and also the cancellation of the mortgages. Thus, as the decree in the redemption suit had been complied with, it dismissed the second appeal as having become infructuous. Payment had been made and, after receiving the same, the appellant had returned the original title deeds to the respondent in respect of the property which was the subject-matter of the two mortgages dated 16.03.1995 and 17.04.1995. 20. It was further submitted that in the criminal case filed by the appellant against the respondent under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, this Court dismissed Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.994 of 20197, confirming the acquittal of the respondent. As regards the Second Impugned Order, it was submitted that the facts recorded therein speak for themselves and the appellant did not deserve any indulgence. Based on the above pleas, the respondent has sought dismissal of the instant appeals. 7 Order dated 28.08.2023 reads as below: “Heard learned counsel for the petitioner. After having perused the evidence of the petitioner- complainant, we are satisfied that the acquittal of the respondent is a possible conclusion, which could have been recorded by the High Court. Though, something can be said about the manner in which the findings have been recorded by the High Court, we are recording our findings after having perused the evidence of the complainant. Hence, we concur with the ultimate order of the High Court and accordingly, the special leave petition stands dismissed. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.”12 ANALYSIS, REASONING & CONCLUSION: 21. Having given our anxious thought to the lis, we find that the Orders impugned need interference. 22. In our view, the Single Judge had appreciated the bundle of facts in the correct perspective, that is, the respondent had, by way of the Agreement, created a mortgage by deposit of title deeds. There was no redemption of this mortgage. The Division Bench fell in error in concluding that “The plaint averments are self-contradictory, vague and does not make out a clear case of mortgage.” (sic). Moreover, the plea of the respondent that the mortgage was redeemed is factually incorrect. Another point not noted by the Division Bench is that the mortgage which took care of the return of Rs.8,50,000/- (Rupees Eight Lakhs Fifty Thousand), was never redeemed and initially, only re the two previous mortgages, the principal amount of Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Fifty Thousand) was returned, without the agreed interest. As noted above, subsequent to the passing of the Impugned Orders, in SA No.1235 of 2014, interim Order dated 25.08.2022 had directed the respondent to pay the appellant a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs), being the principal and interest on both the mortgages. This stood complied with and the SA was dismissed as having become infructuous on 24.01.2023.13 23. However, the Agreement envisaged property worth Rs.9,00,000/- (Rupees Nine Lakhs) out of the total claimed due of Rs. 11,00,000/- (Rupees Eleven Lakhs), being registered in favour of the appellant or his nominee. The Agreement also stipulated that after redeeming the earlier/previous mortgages, the respondent would re-mortgage for the purpose of raising Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs). Thereafter, the said sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs) would be paid to the appellant. The said condition was not followed through i.e., no Sale Deed was executed and registered, nor was the sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs) paid. We are of the view that in such a case, it was well-within the competence of the appellant to move the Court, which he did by instituting the suit. 24. Another factor is that the appellant was not heard in the appeal, as recorded in the First Impugned Order itself. Undoubtedly, in the face of non-appearance by the appellant before it, the Division Bench was free to proceed with final hearing of the appeal, as it did. However, what seems to have transpired is that in the absence of the appellant, what was averred by the respondent in the appeal was accepted as correct by the Division Bench. Fact remained that the respondent admitted to having executed Exhibit P-1 (the Agreement) and that the signature(s) thereon were his, in the Proof Affidavit dated 01.03.2010 as also cross-14 examination dated 08.03.2010. No doubt, he (respondent) has denied its voluntary execution and contended that it was under coercion and threat, but no evidence was brought or led by him to support this plea. The Division Bench opined, correctly, that “It is true that there was no supporting evidence adduced by him to show as to how he was threatened and forced to execute Ex.P1.” Pausing here, we may emphasise that for every fact which is pleaded, there has to be evidence, either oral or documentary, to substantiate the same. A bald averment or mere statement by a defendant bereft of evidentiary material to back up such averment/statement takes such defendant’s case nowhere. While deciding a statutory appeal under Section 116A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 against an order of the Gauhati High Court rejecting an Election Petition, this Court in Kalyan Kumar Gogoi v Ashutosh Agnihotri, (2011) 2 SCC 532 commented that the term ‘evidence’ is used colloquially in different senses: “33. The word “evidence” is used in common parlance in three different senses: (a) as equivalent to relevant, (b) as equivalent to proof, and (c) as equivalent to the material, on the basis of which courts come to a conclusion about the existence or non-existence of disputed facts. Though, in the definition of the word “evidence” given in Section 3 of the Evidence Act one finds only oral and documentary evidence, this word is also used in phrases such as best evidence, circumstantial evidence, corroborative evidence, derivative evidence, direct evidence, documentary evidence, hearsay evidence, indirect evidence, oral evidence, original evidence, presumptive evidence,15 primary evidence, real evidence, secondary evidence, substantive evidence, testimonial evidence, etc.” (emphasis supplied) 25. However, we see in the facts at hand that there is no dispute qua execution of the Agreement.

--- JUDGMENT 3 ---
The respondent claims/pleads coercion etc. Arguendo, such was the case, what would assume relevance would be the steps taken immediately thereafter by the respondent. Admittedly, no steps whatsoever were taken, in law, by the respondent to resile from the Agreement or to revoke it for at least half a decade i.e., from the date of the Agreement till the suit came to be instituted. The respondent did not even lodge appropriate legal proceedings and hence, it does not lie in his mouth to take the plea that the Agreement was not signed voluntarily. If such coercion etc. had actually occurred, the respondent has no explanation to offer as to why he did not avail of any civil law remedy (to have the Agreement nullified or voided) or take recourse to criminal law (filing a complaint or registering a First Information Report). What seems clear to us is that the panchayat tried to resolve the dispute and that led to the Agreement between the parties. 26. It would be profitable to refer to some decisions, after looking at the relevant provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”). Chapter IV of the Act is entitled “Of Mortgages16 Of Immovable Property And Charges” and the relevant Section is quoted below: “58. “‘Mortgage’, ‘mortgagor’, ‘mortgagee’, ‘mortgage-money’ and ‘mortgage-deed’” defined.— (a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immoveable property for the purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, an existing or future debt, or the performance of an engagement which may give rise to a pecuniary liability. The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee a mortgagee; the principal money and interest of which payment is secured for the time being are called the mortgage-money, and the instrument (if any), by which the transfer is effected is called a mortgage-deed. (b) Simple mortgage.—Where, without delivering possession of the mortgaged property, the mortgagor binds himself personally to pay the mortgage-money, and agrees, expressly or impliedly, that, in the event of his failing to pay according to his contract, the mortgagee shall have a right to cause the mortgaged property to be sold and the proceeds of sale to be applied, so far as may be necessary, in payment of the mortgage-money, the transaction is called a simple mortgage and the mortgagee a simple mortgagee. (c) Mortgage by conditional sale.—Where the mortgagor ostensibly sells the mortgaged property— on condition that on default of payment of the mortgage-money on a certain date the sale shall become absolute, or on condition that on such payment being made the sale shall become void, or on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to the seller, the transaction is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee a mortgagee by conditional sale: Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the condition is embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect the sale. (d) Usufructuary mortgage.—Where the mortgagor delivers possession or expressly or by implication17 binds himself to deliver possession of the mortgaged property to the mortgagee, and authorises him to retain such possession until payment of the mortgage- money, and to receive the rents and profits accruing from the property or any part of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in lieu of interest, or in payment of the mortgage-money, or partly in lieu of interest or partly in payment of the mortgage-money, the transaction is called an usufructuary mortgage and the mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee. (e) English mortgage.—Where the mortgagor binds himself to re-pay the mortgage-money on a certain date, and transfers the mortgaged property absolutely to the mortgagee, but subject to a proviso that he will re-transfer it to the mortgagor upon payment of the mortgage-money as agreed, the transaction is called an English mortgage. (f) Mortgage by deposit of title-deeds .—Where a person in any of the following towns, namely, the towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, and in any other town which the State Government concerned may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette , specify in this behalf, delivers to a creditor or his agent documents of title to immoveable property, with intent to create a security thereon, the transaction is called a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds. (g) Anomalous mortgage.—A mortgage which is not a simple mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale, an usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds within the meaning of this section is called an anomalous mortgage.” (emphasis supplied) 27. In Syndicate Bank v Estate Officer & Manager, APIIC Ltd., (2007) 8 SCC 361, this Court held: “28. The requisites of an equitable mortgage are : (i) a debt; (ii) a deposit of title deeds; and (iii) an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt. The existence of the first and third ingredients of the said requisites is not in dispute. The territorial restrictions18 contained in the said provision also does not stand as a bar in creating such a mortgage. The principal question, which, therefore, requires consideration is as to whether for satisfying the requirements of Section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act, it was necessary to deposit documents showing complete title or good title and whether all the documents of title to the property were required to be deposited. A fortiori the question which would arise for consideration is as to whether in all such cases, the property should have been acquired by reason of a registered document. xxx 38.

--- JUDGMENT 4 ---
435- 36, para 10) “10. The foregoing discussion may be summarised thus: Under the Transfer of Property Act a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is one of the forms of mortgages whereunder there is a transfer of interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan. Therefore, such a mortgage of property takes effect against a mortgage deed subsequently executed and registered in respect of the same property. The three requisites for such a mortgage are, (i) debt, (ii) deposit of title deeds; and (iii) an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt. Whether there is an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt is a question of fact in each case. The said fact will have to be decided just like any other fact on presumptions and on oral, documentary or circumstantial evidence. There is no presumption of law that the mere deposit of title deeds constitutes a mortgage, for no such presumption has been laid down either in the Evidence Act or in the Transfer of Property Act. But a court may presume under Section 114 of the Evidence Act that under certain circumstances a loan and a deposit of title deeds constitute a mortgage. But that is really an inference as to the existence of one fact from the existence of some other fact or facts. Nor the fact that at the time the title deeds were deposited19 there was an intention to execute a mortgage deed in itself negatives, or is inconsistent with, the intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds to be in force till the mortgage deed was executed. The decisions of English Courts making a distinction between the debt preceding the deposit and that following it can at best be only a guide; but the said distinction itself cannot be considered to be a rule of law for application under all circumstances. Physical delivery of documents by the debtor to the creditor is not the only mode of deposit. There may be a constructive deposit. A court will have to ascertain in each case whether in substance there is a delivery of title deeds by the debtor to the creditor. If the creditor was already in possession of the title deeds, it would be hypertechnical to insist upon the formality of the creditor delivering the title deeds to the debtor and the debtor redelivering them to the creditor. What would be necessary in those circumstances is whether the parties agreed to treat the documents in the possession of the creditor or his agent as delivery to him for the purpose of the transaction.” The question which arose therein was that what would be the extent of subject-matter of mortgage; the entire property forming the subject-matter of mortgage or a part thereof.” (emphasis supplied) 28. In the interest of completeness, we may note that the Bench of 2 learned Judges in Syndicate Bank (supra) had referred to a larger Bench, the question as to whether a property could be equitably mortgaged by deposit of documents other than the title deeds or registered title document. However, the 3-Judges Bench in Syndicate Bank v Estate Officer and Manager (Recoveries), Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited, (2021) 3 SCC 736 was20 “of the opinion that the reference need not be answered in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case since in our opinion the State of Andhra Pradesh and its successor viz. APIIC and Telangana Industrial Infrastructure Ltd., are estopped from challenging the validity of the mortgage.” In State of Haryana v Narvir Singh, (2014) 1 SCC 105, this Court observed: “11. A mortgage inter alia means transfer of interest in the specific immovable property for the purpose of securing the money advanced by way of loan. Section 17(1)(c) of the Registration Act provides that a non- testamentary instrument which acknowledges the receipt or payment of any consideration on account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extension of any such right, title or interest, requires compulsory registration. A mortgage by deposit of title deeds in terms of Section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act surely acknowledges the receipt and transfer of interest and, therefore, one may contend that its registration is compulsory. However, Section 59 of the Transfer of Property Act mandates that every mortgage other than a mortgage by deposit of title deeds can be effected only by a registered instrument. In the face of it, in our opinion, when the debtor deposits with the creditor title deeds of the property for the purpose of security, it becomes a mortgage in terms of Section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act and no registered instrument is required under Section 59 thereof as in other classes of mortgage. The essence of a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is the handing over, by a borrower to the creditor, the title deeds of immovable property with the intention that those documents shall constitute security, enabling the creditor to recover the money lent. After the deposit of the title deeds the creditor and borrower may record the transaction in a memorandum but such a memorandum would not be an instrument of mortgage. A memorandum reducing other terms and conditions with regard to the deposit in the form of a21 document, however, shall require registration under Section 17(1)(c) of the Registration Act, but in a case in which such a document does not incorporate any term and condition, it is merely evidential and does not require registration. 12.

--- JUDGMENT 5 ---
This Court had the occasion to consider this question in Rachpal Mahra j v . Bhagwandas Daruka [1950 SCC 195: AIR 1950 SC 272] and the statement of law made therein supports the view we have taken, which would be evident from the following passage of the judgment: (AIR p. 273, para 4) “4. A mortgage by deposit of title deeds is a form of mortgage recognised by Section 58(f) of the TP Act, which provides that it may be effected in certain towns (including Calcutta) by a person ‘delivering to his creditor or his agent documents of title to immovable property with intent to create a security thereon’. That is to say, when the debtor deposits with the creditor the title deeds of his property with intent to create a security, the law implies a contract between the parties to create a mortgage, and no registered instrument is required under Section 59 as in other forms of mortgage. But if the parties choose to reduce the contract to writing, the implication is excluded by their express bargain, and the document will be the sole evidence of its terms. In such a case the deposit and the document both form integral parts of the transaction and are essential ingredients in the creation of the mortgage. As the deposit alone is not intended to create the charge and the document, which constitutes the bargain regarding the security, is also necessary and operates to create the charge in conjunction with the deposit, it requires registration under Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, as a non- testamentary instrument creating an interest in immovable property, where the value of such property is one hundred rupees and upwards. The time factor is not decisive. The document may be handed over to the creditor along with the title deeds and yet may not be registrable.” 13. This Court while relying on the aforesaid judgment in United Bank of India Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 6 ---
1593, para 7) “7. … It is essential to bear in mind that the essence of a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is the actual handing over by a borrower to the lender of documents of title to immovable property with the intention that those documents shall constitute a security which will enable the creditor ultimately to recover the money which he has lent. But if the parties choose to reduce the contract to writing, this implication of law is excluded by their express bargain, and the document will be the sole evidence of its terms. In such a case the deposit and the document both form integral parts of the transaction and are essential ingredients in the creation of the mortgage. It follows that in such a case the document which constitutes the bargain regarding security requires registration under Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, as a non-testamentary instrument creating an interest in immovable property, where the value of such property is one hundred rupees and upwards. If a document of this character is not registered it cannot be used in the evidence at all and the transaction itself cannot be proved by oral evidence either.” xxx 14.2. But the question is whether a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is required to be done by an instrument at all. In our opinion, it may be effected in a specified town by the debtor delivering to his creditor documents of title to immovable property with the intent to create a security thereon. No instrument is required to be drawn for this purpose. However, the parties may choose to have a memorandum prepared only showing deposit of the title deeds. In such a case also registration is not required. But in a case in which the memorandum recorded in writing creates rights, liabilities or extinguishes those, the same requires registration. 14.3. In our opinion, the letter of the Finance Commissioner would apply in cases where the instrument of deposit of title deeds incorporates the terms and conditions in addition to what flows from the23 mortgage by deposit of title deeds. But in that case there has to be an instrument which is an integral part of the transaction regarding the mortgage by deposit of title deeds. A document merely recording a transaction which is already concluded and which does not create any rights and liabilities does not require registration. 14.4. Nothing has been brought on record to show existence of any instrument which has created or extinguished any right or liability. In the case in hand, the original deeds have just been deposited with the Bank. In the face of it, we are of the opinion that the charge of mortgage can be entered into revenue record in respect of mortgage by deposit of the title deeds and for that, an instrument of mortgage is not necessary. A mortgage by deposit of the title deeds further does not require registration. Hence, the question of payment of registration fee and stamp duty does not arise. xxx 14.5. By way of abundant caution and at the cost of repetition we may, however, observe that when the borrower and the creditor choose to reduce the contract into writing and if such a document is the sole evidence of the terms between them, the document shall form an integral part of the transaction and the same shall require registration under Section 17 of the Registration Act.” (emphasis supplied) 29. We are of the opinion that the Single Judge has appreciated the law correctly as far as the Agreement is concerned to hold it to be a mortgage in view of Section 58(f) of the Act. We have read and re-read the Agreement. We have also minutely considered the exposition of law made in Narvir Singh (supra). We are of the opinion that the Agreement only records what has happened and does not create/extinguish rights/liabilities. It would, therefore, be covered by para 14.3 of Narvir24 Singh (supra), as highlighted hereinbefore. The reasoning of the Division Bench proceeds as under: “10. …The recitals of the document marked as Ex.P1 and duly extracted in the judgment does not contain any, clear admission that a mortgage was created on the property. The document proceeds as if the appellant agreed to pay a sum of Rs.11 lakhs in full and final settlement. There is nothing to show that a mortgage was created. Even in the evidence given by the respondent as P.W.1, it was his case that the parent document was handed over only as a security. Such being the evidence on record, the learned single Judge was not correct in giving a finding that mortgage was created and the title deed was given in furtherance of the mortgage. We are therefore of the view that there is no evidence adduced by the respondent to show that a mortgage deed was executed by the appellant and as such, he is entitled to a mortgage decree. …” (sic) 30. Quite evidently, the Division Bench did not account for Section 58(f) of the Act. Indubitably, the respondent pleaded threat and coercion whilst executing/signing the Agreement, yet having accepted that he did sign the same in his own hand, the burden was on him to prove such threat/coercion. Looked at from any angle, the First Impugned Order suffers from legal errors, and cannot withstand the scrutiny of law. At the cost of repetition, it is to be stated that the Single Judge has rightly considered the factual prism and focused on the core issue without reference to facts which were irrelevant and not germane to the issue(s) before her.25 31. The Second Impugned Order raises serious questions about how and why the appellant went into slumber. If we may say so, a ‘fantastic’ plea was taken that the appellant had engaged a counsel only for the delay condonation MP and not to argue the main appeal. Such a contention is noted only for the purpose of outright rejection. This ‘fantastic’ plea has been dealt with correctly by the Division Bench and no legal infirmity can be found therein. 32. Alas, only if things were as simple as they seemed! We have already indicated that the First Impugned Order has to be set aside. In order to do justice, quashing of the First Impugned Order would necessarily mean that the effect of the Second Impugned Order would get nullified, for all practical purposes, despite this Court being of the view that on its own merits, the Second Impugned Order cannot be faulted. However, for such legal misadventure resulting in wastage of precious judicial time of the High Court, which could have been better spent answering the call of justice raised by the teeming millions, we impose costs of Rs.1,20,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Twenty Thousand) on the appellant. Such cost shall be deposited within 6 weeks with the Registry of the High Court, to be utilised as follows: i. Rs.40,000 for juvenile welfare in a manner to be decided by the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Committee;26 ii. Rs.40,000 for welfare of the Advocate-Clerks in a manner to be decided by Hon’ble the Acting Chief Justice, and; iii. Rs.40,000 for legal aid in a manner to be decided by the High Court Legal Services Committee. Receipt of deposit be filed in the Registry of this Court soon thereafter. In case of non-compliance, the matter will be placed before us with appropriate Office Report.

--- JUDGMENT 7 ---
I.A. No.16203/2019 seeks condonation of delay in filing the petitions. There is a delay of 589 days in filing the petition against the27 First Impugned Order. The petition against the Second Impugned Order is also delayed by approximately 84 days. We are cognizant that the appellant had moved the Division Bench seeking a fresh hearing of the main appeal, which led to passing of the Second Impugned Order. In Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag v Mst Katiji, (1987) 2 SCC 107, the Court noted that it had been adopting a justifiably liberal approach in condoning delay and that “justice on merits” is to be preferred as against what “scuttles a decision on merits”. Albeit, while reversing an order of the High Court therein condoning delay, principles to guide the consideration of an application for condonation of delay were culled out in Esha Bhattacharjee v Managing Committee of Raghunathpur Nafar Academy, (2013) 12 SCC 649. One of the factors taken note of therein was that substantial justice is paramount8. 37. In N L Abhyankar v Union of India, (1995) 1 MhLJ 503, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court at Nagpur considered, though in the context of delay vis-à-vis Article 226 of the Constitution, the decision in M/s Dehri Rohtas Light Railway Company Limited v District Board, Bhojpur, (1992) 2 SCC 598, and held that “The real test for sound exercise of discretion by the High Court in this regard is not the physical running of time as such, but the test is whether by reason of delay there is such negligence on the part of the petitioner, so as to infer 8 Para 21.3 of Esha Bhattacharjee (supra).28 that he has given up his claim or whether before the petitioner has moved the Writ Court, the rights of the third parties have come into being which should not be allowed to be disturbed unless there is reasonable explanation for the delay.”9 The Bombay High Court’s eloquent statement of the correct position in law found approval in Municipal Council, Ahmednagar v Shah Hyder Beig, (2000) 2 SCC 48 and Mool Chandra v Union of India, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1878. 38.

--- JUDGMENT 8 ---
1 2024 INSC 818 [NON-REPORTABLE] IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3398/2024 VIMALAKKA RAMAPPA KOLI @ TALWAR Appellant(s) VERSUS THE STATE OF KARNATAKA Respondent(s) JUDGMENT ABHAY S.OKA, J. FACTUAL ASPECTS 1. The appellant-accused was prosecuted for the offences punishable under Sections 196, 198, and 420 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’). The allegation of the prosecution is that on an application made by the appellant on 9th September, 2022 to the competent authority falsely claiming that she belongs to Hindu Holer Caste, which was a Scheduled Caste, a caste certificate was issued stating that she belongs to Hindu Holer Caste. Based on the caste certificate, the appellant applied for a grant of a loan to Karnataka Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Development Corporation Limited, Belgaum and the loan was granted. Later on, the certificate was scrutinized by the District Caste Verification Committee (the Committee), which concluded that the appellant did not belong to the Hindu Holer Caste but2 belonged to the Hindu Talwar Caste. Accordingly, the Committee invalidated the caste certificate. Based on the First Information Report registered, a charge sheet was filed against the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 196, 198 and 420 of the IPC. 2. The learned Judicial Magistrate passed an order of acquittal. In an appeal against acquittal preferred by the respondent-State, the Sessions Court, by judgment dated 21st January, 2015, overturned the order of acquittal and convicted the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 196, 198 and 420 of the IPC. The appellant was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for three years and a fine of Rs.5,000/-. In default, he was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for three months. The same sentence was imposed for the offences punishable under Sections 198 and 420 of the IPC. 3. In a revision petition filed by the appellant, the High Court confirmed the conviction for the offences punishable under Sections 198 and 420 of the IPC by the impugned judgment. However, it acquitted the appellant for the offence punishable under Section 196 of the IPC. The High Court reduced the substantive sentence to six months. SUBMISSIONS 4. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the appellant is that while overturning the order of acquittal,3 there is no finding recorded by the Sessions Court that ingredients of offences punishable under Sections 196, 198 and 415 read with Section 420 of the IPC were proved by the prosecution. He submitted that the Sessions Court was impressed by the fact that the appellant did not challenge the order cancelling the caste certificate. The learned counsel appearing for the State supported the impugned judgments of the Sessions Court and High Court. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 5. We have carefully perused the judgment of the Trial and Sessions Courts. As far as an appeal against acquittal is concerned, the law is well settled. The Appellate Court has to examine whether the findings recorded in the acquittal judgment are plausible findings that could have been recorded based on the evidence on record. Only if the Appellate Court is satisfied that the guilt of the accused is duly proved was the only plausible finding which could have been recorded based on the evidence on record, the Appellate Court can overturn the order of acquittal. In this case, no such finding has been recorded by the Sessions Court. Only because it is possible to take another view is no ground to overturn an order of acquittal. 6. We find that the Sessions Court has not adverted to the ingredients of the offences for which the appellant was convicted. Perhaps the Sessions Court felt troubled because4 there were many cases where the caste certificates issued by the competent authority were being invalidated, and people were taking undue advantage of such certificates. Moreover, the Sessions Court was impressed by the fact that the appellant did not challenge the Committee’s order invalidating the caste certificate. 7. As there is no finding recorded that the ingredients of the offences alleged have been proved, the order of conviction passed by the Sessions Court cannot be sustained. Section 198 of the IPC reads thus: “198. Using as true a certificate known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.” (Underline supplied) The Section used the word “corruptly”. Therefore, it is obvious that mens rea is an essential ingredient of the offence. Only because the appellant could not establish her caste claim before the Committee, one cannot conclude that the appellant corruptly used the caste certificate. Moreover, corruptly using the certificate is not sufficient. The accused must have knowledge that the certificate is false. The allegation that the certificate is false to the knowledge of the appellant must be proved by the prosecution.5 8. When the competent authority grants a caste certificate, it can be invalidated on various grounds. One reason can be that the person could not substantiate his caste claim. The second can be that fabricated or forged documents were produced to support the caste claim. There is no finding that the caste certificate was invalidated on this ground. It is not in dispute that the caste certificate was issued by the authority which was competent to issue it after following due procedure. Therefore, the caste certificate, per se, cannot be false or fabricated. If a caste certificate is invalidated as the applicant could not prove his caste cannot be termed false only on the ground that it was invalidated. There is no evidence to show that the caste certificate was false. Therefore, the ingredients of Section 198 of the IPC were not made out. 9. The same is the case with cheating, defined by Section 415 of the IPC and punishable under Section 420 of the IPC. Fraudulent or dishonest acts are essential ingredients of cheating. The Sessions Court has recorded no such finding regarding any fraudulent or dishonest acts on the part of the appellant. 10. This is not a case where the Committee had recorded a categorical finding on facts that the claim made by the appellant was false. 11. Considering the above discussion, it is evident that the6 Sessions Court could not have overturned the order of acquittal. The High Court while confirming the order of the Sessions Court has not even considered the fact that the Sessions Court has not recorded a finding that ingredients of the offences were established. Therefore, the appeal must succeed. Judgment and order dated 21st January, 2015 passed by the Learned VII Additional District and Sessions Judge, Belgaum in Criminal Appeal No.2/2014 and judgment and order dated 11th August, 2015 passed by the High Court in Criminal Revision Petition No.100045/2015 are hereby set aside, and the judgment of the learned Magistrate dated 26th August, 2023 in CC No.374/2005 is hereby restored. 12.

--- JUDGMENT 9 ---
2. By the said judgment, learned trial Court convicted the accused appellant and accused Omkar for the offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 11860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’) while acquitting accused Sobran and Durvin from the charges. The accused appellant as well as accused Omkar were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, each and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year. This Court is informed that accused Omkar has served out the sentence awarded to him and was released on remission. Brief facts: - 3. The first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) gave a written report(Ex.Ka.15) at the Police Station Dannahar, District Mainpuri alleging that his sister, brother-in-law and nephew- Sanju(deceased) were residing nearby his house in village Gokulpur for the last 15 years; on 31st August, 2002, at about 5.00 p.m., accused Omkar came and asked Sanju(deceased) to remove his Naands(Hauda) from the land of the accused, to which, Sanju(deceased) objected saying that the Naands(Hauda) were existing there for a long time; at this, accused Omkar armed with a rifle of 315 bore along with Jagvir Singh(appellant herein) armed with country made pistol climbed on the roof of house of accused Omkar and exhorted the two accused(Durvin and Sobran) to 2surround Sanju(deceased); the accused Durvin and Sobran who were armed with country made pistols went to the house of Sanju(deceased) who on account of fear and to save his life climbed up to the roof of informant’s house. Accused Omkar and Jagvir fired shots at Sanju(deceased) from the roof of Omkar’s house. On hearing the noise, Ram Naresh-first informant(PW-5) and Ram Prakash(PW-1) rushed to the courtyard and found injured-Sanju trying to step down, but he rolled down near the staircase and died in the courtyard. All four accused ran away from the spot after firing gunshots.

--- JUDGMENT 10 ---
On the basis of the said report, FIR No. 85 of 2002 (Ex.Ka.2) dated 31st August, 2002 came to be registered against the four accused namely Omkar, Jagvir Singh, Durvin and Sobran. Investigation was assigned to Ganga Prasad Gautam(PW-6) who prepared the inquest report(Ex.Ka.6) and other spot documents. The dead body of Sanju was subjected to autopsy by Dr. M.L. Gupta, Medical Officer(PW-3) who prepared the post mortem report(Ex.Ka.1) taking note of four abrasions and two firearm wounds on the body of the deceased. The entry wound was located on the chest area and the exit wound was located on the back of the chest. The Medical Officer(PW-3) opined that the death of Sanju 3was caused due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante mortem injuries. The Site Inspection Plan(Ex.Ka.12) was prepared, statements of witnesses were recorded and a country-made pistol was recovered vide recovery memo(Ex.Ka.13) on being pointed out by the accused appellant Jagvir Singh. 5. Upon conclusion of the investigation, a charge sheet(Ex.Ka.14) came to be filed against the four accused persons nominated in the FIR for the offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC. 6. Since the offence was exclusively sessions triable, the case was committed and transferred to the Court of Additional Sessions Judge No.1, Mainpuri(‘trial Court’). The trial Court framed charges against the accused persons for the above offences. They abjured their guilt and claimed trial. The prosecution examined seven witnesses, exhibited 15 documents and 8 material objects to prove its case. The statements of the accused persons were recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as 'CrPC’). They denied having committed the crime and claimed to have been falsely implicated. The accused appellant Jagvir Singh stated in his Section 313 CrPC statement that “Pradhan-Ramvir and others were firing from the 4roof of informant which hit deceased-Sanju standing in veranda, due to which, Sanju died”. 7. The learned trial Court, proceeded to rely upon the testimony of Ram Prakash(PW-1)(father of Sanju), Sultan Singh(PW-2)(uncle of Sanju), and Ram Naresh(PW-5)(the first informant and maternal uncle of Sanju) as being eyewitnesses of the occurrence. 8. The evidence of Medical Officer(PW-3) was treated as conclusive to establish the fact regarding the homicidal death of Sanju. Upon conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court acquitted two accused Durvin and Sobran and convicted the accused appellant and accused Omkar by judgment dated 25th November, 2003 and sentenced them on above terms by order of sentence dated 27th November, 2003. 9. The appeal preferred on behalf of the accused appellant challenging the conviction and sentence was rejected by learned Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court by judgment dated 10th May, 2019 which is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. Submissions on behalf of the appellant: 10. Shri Kaushal Yadav, learned counsel for the accused appellant vehemently urged that the testimony of so called eye 5witnesses, Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) is totally unreliable and they are concocted witnesses as they were not present at the crime scene. 11. It was submitted that the manner and location at which Sanju(deceased) received the injuries would make it clear that none of these so called eye witnesses were in a position to see the incident. 12. He urged that as per the admitted case of prosecution, gunshots were fired by the accused persons while standing on the roof of the house of accused Omkar and that time Sanju received the gunshot injury while standing on the roof of the house of his maternal uncle Ram Naresh(PW-5). Drawing the Court’s attention to the Site Inspection Plan(Ex.Ka.12) prepared by Ganga Prasad Gautam, Investigating Officer(PW-6), learned counsel urged that there is a gap of almost 3-4 houses between the two spots. The eyewitnesses were admittedly not anywhere near Sanju(deceased) and were admittedly on the ground when the gunshots were fired at him. 13. Thus, there was no possibility that any of these witnesses could have actually seen the incident of firing or identified the assailant(s) who fired gunshots at Sanju(deceased). 614. Attention of the Court was drawn to the certain excerpts from the evidence of the three star prosecution witnesses namely, Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) which are reproduced hereinbelow:- Examination in Chief of Ram Prakash(PW-1) “Omkar had 315 bore illegal rifle and Jagvir had illegal country made gun and Sobran and Durvin were also carrying illegal weapons in their hands, they came to my house and Omkar asked them to surround Sanju, Sanju climbed the wall of my under constructed house and ran towards his maternal Uncle's house. The accused reached the roof of their house and Sanju has reached the roof of his Uncle's house. On chaos myself and my brother in law Ram Naresh also reached the roof of the house. I was about 10 paces away from Sanju when Omkar fired on him. Out of fear we came down and Sanju also followed us. Sanju was shot on roof itself and while getting down the blood was flowing and he stumbled upon the stairs. After falling from the staircase he died on the spot” Cross Examination of Ram Prakash(PW-1) “I work in the bangle factory in Firozabad. My village Gokulpur to Firozabad where I work in the factory is about 56-57 kms away. The witness of the incident is Sultan Singh who is the son of Ramvir Pradhan's uncle. He is nephew in relation to my wife Shaitan. During the incident I used to stay in Firozabad in the rented accommodation. Accused Omkar house is towards the north side of my village. There is a Chak Road which runs from Omkar's house. The chak road is used to travel for the city, there are 3 rooms in Omkar's house facing towards east. Each room is at least 5-5 or 6-6 feet long. There is a dilapidated house while coming towards my house from Omkar's house. The dilapidated house is about 10-12feet long. There is a Girdhari's finished house which is 18feets long in north south and my brother in laws Ram Naresh house is situated along with house of Girdhari which has one room and a veranda. There is a balcony in front of the veranda. Both the doors of the room of Ram Naresh house open in the veranda. Both the rooms of Ram Naresh is about 6- 6 or 7-7 feet long. Veranda is about 10-11 feet long. It is connected with the wall of my house, one room of Ram Naresh 7a courtyard and two other room, right after that is my house. There is a room within a veranda towards the east having staircase used for going on to the roof. There is no other way to reach the roof of Ram Naresh. Accused Omkar's house cannot be seen by standing in the veranda of Ram Naresh. We ran after my son incurred injury of fire. My signature was not taken by the Inspector on the Fard. My signatures was not taken anywhere in the Panchama. The people who registered the report informed me that your name is also mentioned as the witness.” Examination in Chief of Sultan Singh(PW-2) “Date of incident 31.08.2002 at about 5 pm in the evening. I was cutting grass at the time of the incident in my field.

--- JUDGMENT 11 ---
I heard the sound of the abuse and that surround him so that he cannot run away. I saw this while standing on the ram of my field that the Omkar was carrying 315 bore rifle, Jagvir carrying country made gun and these people were standing on the roof of Omkar. I saw that Omkar fired on Sanju who was standing on the roof of Ram Naresh. The fire shot hit Sanju. Jagvir also fired. 3-4 firing was made on the roof. Sanju incurred firearm injury, he could only come towards the staircase and fell from there. Then I came to the house of Ram Naresh from my field and saw Sanju had died.” Cross Examination of Sultan Singh(PW-2) “My field is 100 mts away from my house towards the south. From my field deceased Sanju's house is visible but the door is not visible nor the complainant Ram Naresh's house and veranda is not visible. I stood in my field after hearing the noise of abuses. I came to the place of incident after the firing took place. I did not see the bullet entering and exit the body of the deceased but i heard the sound of fire and saw Sanju falling down from the staircase.” Examination in Chief of Ram Naresh(PW-5) “At 5 pm 4 people came at the door of Sanju namely Omkar, Soberan, Jagvir and Durvin. After taking fodder when Sanju came to the house then these people asked him to remove his Naands (Hauda) then Sanju replied that Naada (Hauda) were there since his birth and that he will not remove. On this all the 8four people ran away to their houses and Omkar carrying a rifle, Jagveer, Soberan and Durvin carrying country made pistols came there. Durvin and Soberan came in front of the door of Sanju. Omkar asked them to surround him while Omkar and Jagveer climbed on top of the roof. Out of fear of Durvin and Soberan my nephew Sanju reached on the roof of my house from his half constructed house. As soon as me and my brother in law Ram Prakash from the staircase went to the roof then Omkar made 2-3 firing on Sanju. Jagvir also fired. Me and Ram Prakash were climbing the stairs up while Sanju was coming towards the staircase. This incident was witnessed by me, my brother in law, Sultan Singh S/o Moti Lal and all the people from my house. Cross Examination of Ram Naresh(PW-5) In my report I have stated that "I and my brother in law Ram Prakash after hearing the sound of firing went towards the roof we saw Sanju was injured". This is the correct statement. When I climbed one step of the staircase I saw Sanju coming towards the staircase, my brother in law saw the same thing with me. When I and my brother in law reached the courtyard we saw Sanju stumbling down from the staircase from the courtyard where there is a veranda in front of my house, from where the roof of Omkar is not visible. When Inspector arrived Ram Prakash was present at the place of the incident. He was conscious but he did not state anything to the Inspector.” 15. Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that the theory setup by Ram Prakash(PW-1) in his examination-in-chief, that he and Ram Naresh(PW-5) both climbed on to the roof with Sanju(deceased) and saw the gunshots being fired at him is totally falsified and contradicted by Ram Naresh(PW-5) who candidly admitted that he and his brother-in-law Ram Prakash(PW-1), upon hearing the sound of firing, went towards the roof and saw that 9Sanju had been injured by gunshots. This very fact was also mentioned in the FIR(Ex.Ka.2). He also urged that the witness Ram Naresh(PW-5) admitted in his testimony that they saw Sanju stumbling down from the staircase into the courtyard. They were standing in the veranda in front of his house and from there the roof of Omkar’s house is not visible. 16. Learned counsel urged that Ram Prakash(PW-1) being the father of the deceased did not sign any of the documents prepared at the spot. He admitted in his cross examination that during the incident, he used to stay in Firozabad in a rented accommodation which was about 56-57 kms away from his village Gokulpur where the alleged incident took place. The witness also admitted that the people who registered the report informed him that his name was also mentioned as a witness. Learned counsel submitted that the conjoint reading of these admissions as appearing in the evidence of Ram Prakash(PW-1) would make it clear that he was not present at the spot and was created to be an eye witness at a subsequent point of time. 17. It was contended that the allegation made by the witnesses that the accused appellant fired at Sanju while standing beside 10accused Omkar is nothing but a piece of fabrication made owing to prior enmity. 18. It was further submitted that as per Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5), the incident took place in two parts. In the first part, there was an exchange of hot words(arguments) between the four accused and Sanju(deceased). Even at that point of time, all the four accused were carrying weapon in their hands whereas, Sanju(deceased) was alone and unarmed. Thus, if at all, the accused were intending to kill Sanju, then there was no reason for them to have gone away from the house of Ram Naresh(PW-1) where this heated exchange took place. Rather, they could have easily shot and killed Sanju then and there. 19. It was further submitted that the very sequence of events regarding the second part of the incident wherein, the witnesses claimed that the two accused persons Sobran and Durvin were asked to surround Sanju; the accused Omkar and Jagvir Singh(accused appellant) went towards the house of Omkar and climbed on to the roof; that Sanju climbed to the roof of Ram Naresh’s house and then, the gunshots were fired at him by accused Omkar and Jagvir Singh from the terrace of Omkar’s house is on the face of it a piece of fiction without an iota of truth. 1120.

--- JUDGMENT 12 ---
He urged that conviction of the accused appellant is totally unjustified because the testimony of the so-called eyewitnesses is unreliable on the face of the record. Learned counsel thus implored the Court to accept the appeal and quash the impugned judgment and acquit the accused appellant by giving him the benefit of doubt. Submissions on behalf of the Respondent-State: - 21. Per contra, Ms. Garima Prasad, learned Additional Advocate General representing the State of Uttar Pradesh, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant and urged that two Courts, i.e., the trial Court and the High Court, have recorded concurrent findings of facts while convicting the appellant and affirming his conviction and hence, this Court should be slow to interfere in such concurrent findings of facts. She submitted that it is clear from the testimony of the three eye witnesses i.e. Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) that the accused appellant Jagvir Singh and the accused Omkar fired gunshots at Sanju(deceased) causing his death at the spot. She implored the Court to dismiss the appeal.

--- JUDGMENT 13 ---
Discussion and Conclusion: 23. From a perusal of the FIR(Ex.Ka.2), it is manifest that the first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) categorically mentioned in the report that on hearing the gunshots, he and his brother-in-law Ram Prakash(PW-1) climbed on the top of the roof and saw that Sanju(deceased) was injured, and while he was climbing down the staircase, he rolled down, fell in the courtyard near the stairs and died. This fact is even admitted by Ram Naresh(PW-5) during this cross-examination in the following terms: - “However, I mentioned in my report that, “when I and my brother-in-law after hearing the gun shots/fire reached the roof of the house, we saw Sanju injured”, is correct.” 24. The first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) also stated that he and Ram Prakash(PW-1) were climbing up the stairs while Sanju was coming down the staircase. Sanju got down 2-3 steps from the staircase and then stumbled down. When he and his brother- in-law Ram Prakash(PW-1) reached the courtyard, they saw Sanju stumbling down from the staircase from the courtyard, from where the roof of Omkar is not visible. 1325. Thus, apparently, the claim made by Ram Prakash(PW-1) in his evidence that he and Ram Naresh(PW-5) had reached the roof of the house from where they saw Omkar firing at Sanju is a sheer piece of concoction and unacceptable on the face of the record. 26. Another material fact emerging from examination-in-chief of Ram Prakash(PW-1) is that he did not allege that accused appellant Jagvir Singh also fired at Sanju. He also admitted in his cross-examination that the house of accused Omkar will not be visible from the courtyard of Ram Naresh. 27. Both, Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) stated in their testimony that they got alarmed on hearing the sound of gunfire. If at all the shot had been fired from the house of Omkar, there is no reason as to why the witnesses would go to the courtyard of the house of Ram Naresh(PW-5) rather than rushing towards the direction from where the sound of the gunshot had been heard. Manifestly, their attention would be drawn towards the sound of the gunshots being fired and in natural course, they would look towards that direction and not anywhere else. 28. Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) deposed in their testimony that during the second part of the incident; accused Omkar asked the accused Durvin and Sobran(since acquitted) to 14corner and surround Sanju who also rushed to the roof of the house of Ram Naresh(PW-5). 29. We further find that the conduct of the eye-witnesses Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) is totally unnatural. Both the witnesses claimed to have seen Sanju(deceased) being chased and surrounded by accused Durvin and Sobran. Despite, that, neither of them, made an attempt to save Sanju from these assailants or to at least raise a hue and cry so that the neighbouring people could be sounded about the incident. Neither of the witnesses made an attempt to intervene or to shield Sanju. 30. Furthermore, both the witnesses claimed that they saw accused Omkar and accused appellant Jagvir Singh rushing towards the house of Omkar and climbing the roof thereof. Hence, there was no rhyme or reason as to why, Sanju would also climb up the roof of Ram Naresh’s house and take the risk of exposing himself to the offensive intents of the accused persons. 31. The participation of accused Durvin and Sobran in the incident has not been accepted by the trial Court and on that basis, these two accused persons were acquitted. Clearly, thus, the story put forth by the witnesses that accused Durvin and Sobran were also amongst the four offenders who were making an attempt 15to eliminate Sanju is unacceptable and unbelievable. Thus, the quarrel, if any, unquestionably took place between accused Omkar and accused appellant Jagvir Singh on the one side and Sanju on the other. Once accused Omkar and accused appellant Jagvir Singh had moved on from the place where the first part of the incident took place, Sanju had no reason, whatsoever, to climb up the roof of Ram Naresh’s house because he was not facing any threat thereafter. Thus, the entire prosecution case is shrouded under a cloud of doubt.

--- JUDGMENT 14 ---
32. A three judge Bench of this Court in the case of Selveraj v. State of Tamil Nadu1 set aside the concurrent findings of guilt recorded by the trial Court and the High Court, wherein on an appreciation of evidence the prosecution story was found highly improbable and inconsistent of ordinary course of human nature. The relevant extract of which is reproduced hereinbelow: - “4. The conviction of the appellant rests on the oral testimony of Natesan and Manisekaran who claimed to be eyewitnesses to the murder of the deceased. Both the learned Additional Sessions Judge as well as the High Court have believed the evidence of these two witnesses and ordinarily we would be loath to disturb the concurrent view taken by both these Courts as regards the appreciation of their evidence, but we find that there are inherent improbabilities in the story put forward by these two witnesses and we do not think it would be safe to act upon their uncorroborated testimony. In the first place, it is difficult to believe that the appellant was so inflamed with passion as to demand sexual intercourse with the deceased who 1 (1976) 4 SCC 343 16happened to be the wife of his cousin, and that too, not while she was alone, but in the presence of her husband. Even if he was mad with lust, he would not have chosen to come at this particular time, namely, 9 p.m. for making advances to the deceased, when he must have known that her husband Natesan would in all probability be at home. In any event, when Natesan came into the house, the appellant would have run away and not continued to insist that the deceased should submit to sexual intercourse with him. The entire story appears to be highly improbable and inconsistent with the ordinary course of human nature. Then again, look at the conduct of Natesan on seeing this highly explosive situation. He finds that the appellant is demanding sexual intercourse with his wife and is threatening her with a knife in his hand. And yet, he does not step out of the house and shout for help. He does not even try to go to the rescue of the deceased. He silently and shamefacedly watches his wife being murdered by the appellant. He is not alone in the house. Manisekaran has come in the meantime, with the result that there are two persons on his side and yet, both of them quietly watch the proceedings without making any attempt to save the deceased. This conduct is highly unnatural and we find it difficult to accept it. 5. It may be noted that Manisekaran's presence at the time of the incident is rather unusual. Manisekaran was, according to his evidence, working as an apprentice in the tailoring shop of Natesan, and it is difficult to believe that he should have been at the house of Natesan at 9 p.m. after the tailoring shop was closed. Manisekaran was admittedly not staying with Natesan. He was living in a house which was a little distance away from the house of Natesan. He would ordinarily go back to his house after the tailoring shop was closed. But, in order to make Manisekaran an eyewitness, the prosecution came forward with the story that he was sent by Natesan with edibles for his children at 8.15 p.m. This is a tall story which is difficult to believe. There is no reason why at 8.15 p.m. Manisekaran should have been asked by Natesan to purchase edibles from the market and carry them to the house for the children. In all probability the children would have finished their meals. Even if Manisekaran carried edibles to the house of Natesan, there is no reason why he should have waited there for half an hour from 8.30 p.m. to 9 p.m. in order to be able to witness the incident. It is again strange and unusual that though Manisekaran saw the appellant stabbing the deceased, he did not utter any shout or attempt to run out of the house for the purpose of seeking help for the deceased. We are not at all satisfied that Manisekaran was an eyewitness to incident and his testimony cannot be relied upon for the purpose of supporting the conviction of the appellant.” 1733. The so-called eye witnesses, Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) were the closest relatives of the victim. They allegedly saw the fatal assault on the victim and yet did not take any step to save him from the assault. If these witnesses PW-1 and PW-5 had actually seen the assault, their reaction and conduct does not match up with the reaction expected from them. Their conduct is highly unnatural, and we find it difficult to accept their presence at the crime scene.

--- JUDGMENT 15 ---
34. Further, it is evident from the testimony of Ram Prakash(PW- 1) that there is a gap of 3 to 4 houses between the house of Ram Naresh(PW-5) and the house of accused Omkar which makes it clear that the estimated distance between the two locations would be more than 30-40 ft. The Site Inspection Plan(Exhibit P-12) also fortifies our conclusion. Both the witnesses, PW-1 and PW-5 admitted the fact that the roof of accused Omkar was not visible from the courtyard of Ram Naresh(PW-5) in their evidence as we have elaborated above. In this background, we have no hesitation in holding that the so called eye witnesses, PW-1 and PW-5, who were unquestionably standing or moving at the ground level could 18not have seen the gunshots being fired at Sanju(deceased) from the roof of Omkar’s house. 35. Sultan Singh(PW-2) admitted that he was working in his field when the incident took place and thus, there was no possibility that, he could have seen the incident with his own eyes. But despite that, the prosecution tried to project him as an eyewitness of the incident which again creates a grave doubt on the truthfulness and bona fides of the prosecution story. 36. Resultantly, we have no doubt in our mind that neither of the so called eye witnesses i.e., Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW- 2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) had actually seen the gunshots being fired at Sanju(deceased). As a matter of fact, the entire sequence of events as narrated by prosecution witnesses does not inspire confidence. 37. Indisputably, Sanju received a single gunshot injury which proved fatal. Considering the significant disparities and discrepancies in the evidence of Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) regarding the identity of the assailant who actually fired at Sanju(deceased), we feel that the conviction of accused appellant Jagvir Singh on the basis of such flimsy and wavering evidence is not at all justified. The trial Court as well as the High 19Court committed glaring error while holding that Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) were eyewitnesses to the incident and that they saw the accused appellant along with accused Omkar firing at Sanju(deceased). These findings are unsustainable on the face of the record in view of the analyses and discussion of evidence made above.

--- JUDGMENT 16 ---
1 2024 INSC 803 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL No. 11711 OF 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.5017 of 20231) K.C.KAUSHIK AND OTHERS ... APPELLANT(S) VERSUS STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS ... RESPONDENT(S) WITH CIVIL APPEAL No. 11720 OF 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.5018 of 20232) K.R.MALIK AND OTHERS ... APPELLANT(S) VERSUS STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS ... RESPONDENT(S) WITH CIVIL APPEAL No. 11712 OF 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.5019 of 20233) 1Arising from the judgment and order dated 29.09.2022 in LPA No.2396 of 2017 in CWP No.8988 of 2015 (High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh) 2 Arising from the judgment and order dated 29.09.2022 in LPA No.1490 of 2018 in CWP No.10318 of 2015 (High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh) 3Arising from the judgment and order dated 29.09.2022 in LPA No.578 of 2018 in CWP No.11702 of 2015 (High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh)2 INDERJEET BHARTI AND OTHERS ... APPELLANT(S) VERSUS STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS ... RESPONDENT(S) WITH CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 11713-11719 OF 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.8613 – 8619 of 20234) SAVITRI MALIK AND OTHERS ... APPELLANT(S) VERSUS STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS ... RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T R.MAHADEVAN, J. Leave granted.

--- JUDGMENT 17 ---
2. The challenge in these appeals is to the common judgment and order dated 29.09.2022 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh5, in LPA Nos. 2396 of 2017 (O&M) etc. cases6, by 4 Arising from the judgment and order dated 29.09.2022 in LPA No.2396/2017 against CWP No. 8988/2015, LPA No.1454 of 2018 in CWP No.10207/2015, LPA No.1490/2018 in CWP No.10318 of 2015, LPA No.1102/2018 in CWP No.22924/2015, LPA No.1766/2018 in CWP No.11288/2015, LPA No.578/2018 in CWP No.11702/2015 and LPA No.1841 /2018 in CWP No.11654/2015 (High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh) 5 For brevity, “the High Court” 6State of Haryana and another v. Banarsi Dass and others3 which, the High Court has allowed the appeals filed by the State / respondent(s) and set aside the orders of the learned Single Judge dated 30.11.2016 in CWP No.8988 of 2015 and other connected cases, insofar as the grant of interest to the writ petitioners/ appellants herein. 3. The appellants were working as Lecturers / Principals in the Government Aided Private Colleges in the State of Haryana and they retired from service prior to 01.01.2006. Claiming parity with the Lecturers/Librarians of the Government Colleges in relation to the increase of their pension, based on the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pension) Part I Rules, 20097, the appellants preferred the aforesaid civil writ petitions for issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to quash the orders of the respondent authorities denying revised pension to the appellants as that of the employees / teachers of the Government Colleges in Haryana, and to direct the respondent(s) to grant pension to the appellants in the corresponding scale of Rs.37400 – 67000 + AGP8 Rs.9000/- with effect from 01.01.2006 with interest. 4. In the course of hearing of the civil writ petitions, the State counsel produced a copy of the letter dated 07.11.2016 sent by the Principal Secretary to Government of Haryana, Higher Education Department, Chandigarh, addressed to the Director Higher Education, Haryana, Panchkula, by which the State had 7Hereinafter shortly referred as “the Rules, 2009” 8Academic Grade Pay4 agreed to give revised pension to the retired employees of the Private Aided Colleges, and also gave an undertaking on the basis of the instructions furnished by one Assistant by name Preet Singh, who was present in the Court, to the effect that the State would also pay interest on the delayed payment. In view of the said letter and the oral instructions, the learned counsel for the appellants sought to withdraw the petitions. The learned Single Judge recorded all these statements and dismissed the civil writ petitions as withdrawn on 30.11.2016, besides issuing a direction to release the arrears of pension to the appellants within a period of three months. Subsequently, on applications, by order dated 23.12.2016, the word “w.e.f. 01.01.2006” was inserted after the words “revised pension” in the said orders dated 30.11.2016 passed by the learned Single Judge in CWP No.8988 of 2015 and connected cases. 5. Between 2017 and 2018, the State disbursed the arrears of revised pension to the appellants. However, they preferred a Review Application bearing No.RA-CW-383-2017, seeking to review the learned Single Judge's orders dated 30.11.2016 passed in CWP No.8988 of 2015 and connected matters, on the premise that payment of interest on the amount of arrears to be paid w.e.f. 01.01.2006 was not justified as the decision to revise the pension in the pay band of Rs. 37400 - 67000 + 9000 AGP was taken and approved by the Government of Haryana, Finance Department, vide U.O.No. 66/5/2016-2FD-II/28139 dated5 07.10.2016 and therefore, interest on belated payment of pension was payable not from 01.01.2006 but from 07.10.2016. By order dated 16.08.2017, the learned Single Judge dismissed the Review application, with liberty to the State to approach the appellate forum. 6. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed in the Review Application, the State preferred LPA(s) before the Division Bench seeking to set aside the orders of the learned Single Judge dated 30.11.2016, to the extent of granting payment of interest as clarified on 23.12.2016 in the civil writ petitions and on 16.08.2017 in the review application. The High Court allowed the State’s appeals and set aside the orders of the learned Single Judge with respect to grant of interest on delayed payment of revised pension to the appellants, by the common judgment and order impugned herein. 7. In the given facts and circumstances of the case, more particularly that the appellants were paid the revised pension with effect from 01.01.2006, the only question to be answered in all these cases is, whether they are entitled to interest on belated payment of revised pension. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 18 ---
Let us first examine the genesis of the present lis. The Haryana Government, Department of Finance, vide Notification dated 17th April, 2009, framed the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pension) Part - I Rules, 20099, 9 For short, “the Rules, 2009”6 which were deemed to have come into force on the 1st January, 2006. The Rules, 2009 applied to all pensioners / family pensioners, who were drawing their pension/ family pension or who were eligible / entitled to pension/family pension as on 01.01.2006 under the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time and as applicable to the pensioners/family pensioners under the rule making power of Haryana Government. Rule 6 deals with ‘minimum ceiling of pension/family pension’, which reads as under: “6(1). The fixation of revised entitlement of pension shall be subject to the provision that the revised entitlement of pension so worked out shall, in no case, be lower than fifty percent of the minimum of the pay in the pay band + grade pay in the corresponding revised scale in terms of Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008, or as the case may be, Haryana Civil Services (Assured Career Progression) Rules, 2008, to the pre-revised pay scale from which the pensioner had retired. (2) The entitlement of pension calculated at 50 per cent of the minimum of pay in the pay band plus grade pay would be at the minimum of the pay in the pay band (irrespective of the pre-revised scale of pay) plus the grade pay corresponding to the pre-revised pay scale. For example, if a pensioner had retired in the pre-revised scale of pay of Rs.18400-22400, the corresponding pay band being Rs.37400-67000 and the corresponding grade pay being Rs.10,000/- per month his minimum guaranteed pension would be 50 per cent of Rs.37400/- + Rs.10,000 that is Rs.23,700/-. (3) The entitlement of pension is worked out in terms of sub-rules (1) and (2) above shall further be reduced pro-rata in all cases, where the pensioner had less than the minimum service required for full pension as per rules as applicable on 1st January, 2006 and in no case, it will be less than Rs.3500/- per month.” Pursuant to the aforesaid Rules, pay scale was revised and the teachers working in the Government Colleges were receiving the revised pension. While so, the Higher Education Commissioner, Haryana, sent a communication dated 07.09.2010 to the banks, stating that the revised pension will be payable only to those, who were in service as on 01.01.2006 and not to those who had retired7 prior to 01.01.2006 and accordingly, ordered to reduce the pension and recover the excess payment made. The said order was challenged in CWP No.19266 of 2010 and connected cases, titled as Satyapal Yadav v. State of Haryana and others. By order dated 25.07.2012, the said civil writ petitions came to be allowed, by setting aside the order dated 07.09.2010 passed by the Higher Education Commissioner, Haryana, after having held by the learned Single Judge that the petitioners therein had completed 3 years of service in the pre- revised scale of Rs.12000 – 18300 prior to their retirement, i.e., before 01.01.2006, and hence, they are entitled to the fixation of pension by placing them in the minimum pay band of Rs.37400 – 67000 with AGP of Rs.9000/- or revision of their pension / family pension with effect from 01.01.2006. The appeals10 preferred by the State before the Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as well as this Court, ended in dismissal. Since the order dated 25.07.2012 passed in CWP.No.19266 of 2010 and connected cases, attained finality, the Haryana Government complied with the same, by order dated 07.11.2014. 9. In the meanwhile, the appellants approached the respondent authorities seeking pension in the corresponding scale of Rs.37400- 67000 + AGP Rs.9000/- with effect from 01.01.2006 on par with the employees/teachers of the Government Colleges in Haryana, which was rejected on the ground that such 10 LPA No.1955 of 2012 was dismissed on 14.01.2013 and SLP (C) No.26907 of 2013 was dismissed on 10.07.20148 benefit was granted only to the teachers working in the Government colleges and not for the teachers working in Government Aided Colleges. Challenging the said rejection, CWP.No.8988 of 2015 etc.

--- JUDGMENT 19 ---
cases were filed. During the pendency of the same, the State accepted the claim of the appellants and hence, the writ petitions came to be dismissed as withdrawn on 30.11.2016. Seeking to review the order in respect of grant of interest on delayed payment of pension, the State preferred the Review application, which was dismissed. However, the Letter Patent Appeals11 filed by the State were allowed by the High Court, by observing that the appellants were fence-sitters and were seeking the benefits on the strength of the original litigation, which others had successfully contested upto Apex Court and therefore, they cannot be placed at a better footing than the original litigants, who never got interest. The said order of the High Court is questioned in these appeals by special leave. 10. The common submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the appellants in all the appeals is that by the order impugned herein, the appellants have been illegally and arbitrarily denied interest on the belated payment of revised pension w.e.f 01.01.2006, by observing that they were fence-sitters and hence cannot be placed at a better pedestal than the original litigants, who had successfully contested and won the case and were not granted interest. According to the learned counsel, the said observation of the High Court is in 11 LPA Nos.2396 of 2017 etc. cases against the order dated 30.11.2016 in CWP No.8988 of 2015 and connected cases9 complete disregard to the fact that the original litigants referred to in the order impugned herein, were Lecturers/Librarians in the Government Colleges, who had started getting the revised pension w.e.f. 01.01.2006 and from whom recovery was initiated by the respondent authorities on the premise that they were made excess payment and therefore, the issue of interest on delayed payment of pension did not arise therein. It is further elaborated that the appellants who had retired from Government Aided Private Colleges prior to 01.01.2006 were claiming parity with the pension allowed and paid to the Lecturers of Government Colleges and hence, by no stretch of imagination they could be termed as fence sitters; and by payment of interest on the delayed payment of pension, it cannot be said that they will be placed at a better footing than the original litigants, since the original litigants continued to get the revised pension, whereas in the case of the appellants, even the revised pension was not paid to them until the year 2017-2018, despite the passing of the orders dated 30.11.2016 by the learned Single Judge. 11. Continuing further, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that denial of grant of interest to the appellants is contrary to the stand taken by the State in the writ proceedings, in which, the Learned Single Judge passed the orders dated 30.11.2016 on the basis of the undertaking given by the State Counsel that the revised pension is allowed to the appellants, who had retired10 prior to 01.01.2006 and the Government shall pay interest on the delayed payment. Thus, it is urged that in terms of the orders dated 30.11.2016 passed in CWP No.8988 of 2015 etc. cases, the appellants were entitled to revised pension along with interest on the delayed payment. 12. It is also pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellants that in the Contempt Petition bearing COCP No.2846 of 2017 in CWP No. 8988 of 2015, titled as Banarsi Dass and Ors. v.

--- JUDGMENT 20 ---
Jyoti Arora and another, an affidavit was filed by Mrs. Jyoti Arora, Additional Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Higher Education Department, Chandigarh, on 01.05.2018 stating inter alia that the writ petitioners therein are entitled to interest from the date of issuance of the Policy dated 12.10.2010 by the Principal Secretary, Higher Education, Government of Haryana, regarding revision of pension/ family pension of the retirees of Non-Government Affiliated Aided Colleges in the State; and accordingly, interest at 9% was calculated w.e.f. 12.10.2010. However, on 22.10.2018, an additional affidavit dated 22.10.2018 was filed by the said Mrs. Jyoti Arora, stating that the writ petitioners therein are not entitled to any interest. Thus, the respondent authorities have taken different stand at every stage of the proceedings, thereby depriving the appellants from getting their legitimate claim of interest on the delayed payment. Without properly appreciating the same, the High Court erred in allowing the State’s appeals by11 setting aside the orders of the learned Single Judge in respect of grant of interest on the delayed payment to the appellants and hence, the same is liable to be quashed. 13. Opposing the claim of the appellants, the learned counsel for the State / respondent(s) made the following submissions: (i) Rule 6 of the Rules, 2009 specifically deals with the case of Retired Government employees and there is no provision in the Rules, 2009 to award interest for any belated payment; (ii) Earlier and present litigations only pertain to grant of revised pension to the Government College Lecturers and Private Aided College Lecturers, both on the basis of 2009 Rules; (iii) The pay scale revisions are retrospective in nature and are without interest; (iv) interest cannot be offered, based on equitable considerations12; and (v) Concessions made by a Government counsel cannot be granted, unless there are written instructions from a responsible officer13. Thus, the learned counsel submitted that considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court correctly denied the grant of interest on the delayed payment, which does not call for any interference by this court. 14. As a riposte, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the decisions relied on the side of the State are not applicable to the facts of the present case, wherein the case was not contested on merits and based on the 12 Union of India and others v. Dr. J K Goel (1995) Supp (3) SCC 161 13Periyar & Pareekannai Rubber Ltd v. State of Kerala (1991) 4 SCC 19512 statement made by the State in the writ proceedings, the learned Single Judge passed the orders dated 30.11.2016 relating to grant of interest on the delayed payment. It is also submitted that on behalf of the State, one Assistant by name Preet Singh was present in the Court and after obtaining instructions from him, the State counsel made the statement before the learned Single Judge that the Government shall pay interest on the delayed payment. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed to this Court that the State may be directed to grant interest at the rate of 9% from 01.01.2006 or at least from the date on which the Government approved the grant of revised pension to the retired teachers of the Government Aided Private Colleges. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 21 ---
We have considered the submissions made by the learned senior counsel and learned AAG appearing for the parties and perused the materials on record. 16. Concededly, the appellants were paid the arrears of revised pension w.e.f. 01.01.2006, on par with the employees / Lecturers of the Government Colleges, during 2017-2018. Claiming interest on such payment, which was originally granted by the learned Single Judge and was subsequently, denied by the High Court, the appellants are before us. 17. As we have already stated, in terms of the order dated 25.07.2012, which attained finality on 10.07.2014, the retired employees / Lecturers of the Government Colleges were given revised pension with effect from 01.01.2006, on 07.11.2014. However, they were not granted any interest for the payment of13 arrears of pension due to them. Having compared with them, the appellants sought revised pension, by filing CWP No.8988 of 2015 and connected cases. During the writ proceedings, the State accepted the claim of the appellants and paid the arrears of revised pension with effect from 01.01.2006. Therefore, since the appellants were claiming parity with the employees / Lecturers of the Government colleges, they should not be entitled to any payment of interest. 18. Apparently, the entire case of the appellants rests on the factum recorded by the learned Single Judge in his orders dated 30.11.2016 to the effect that the Assistant, Preet Singh gave oral instructions to the State counsel that interest will be given by the Government on delayed payment of revised pension. However, it is interesting to note that there was no written instruction furnished by the State; the appellants did not argue the matter on merits; and the learned Single Judge passed the orders dated 30.11.2016, only on the concessions made on behalf of the State. In such circumstances, the claim of the appellants seeking interest, has no legs to stand. 19. It is also required to be pointed out that the revised structure of pay of teachers and equivalent teachers in Universities and Colleges in Haryana, was issued by the Government of Haryana, Finance Department, on 27.08.2009, which was subsequently clarified on 02.09.2009. On the basis of the same, the employees / teachers working in the Government colleges received the revised pay. In the meanwhile, the Rules, 2009 relating to all pensioners / family14 pensioners, who were drawing their pension/ family pension or who were eligible / entitled to pension / family pension as on 01.01.2006, were notified on 17.04.2009, and they were deemed to have come into force with effect from 01.01.2006. As per Rule 6 of the Rules, 2009, and the subsequent clarification issued by the Higher Education Commissioner, Haryana, the person, who had completed 3 years of service in the pre-revised scale of pay and/ or the corresponding pay scale applicable prior to 01.01.1996, shall be placed in the minimum of the pay band of Rs.37400 – 67000 + AGP of Rs.9000/- for revision of pension / family pension, with effect from 01.01.2006. Pursuant to the same, the retired employees / Lecturers of the Government colleges started litigation in the year 2010, which attained finality in the year 2014 and consequently, they were paid the arrears of revised pension on 07.11.2014. Only thereafter, the appellants initiated the writ proceedings in the year 2015. Thus, it is manifestly clear that the appellants waited till the rights of the retired employees / Lecturers of the Government Colleges, were crystalised and thereafter, made representation to the respondent authorities and hence, they are not entitled to get any interest, by treating them as fence-sitters. Though there may be some lapses on the part of the officials representing the State in furnishing instructions about the case, to the Court, however that by itself will not give any room for the appellants to get unjust enrichment.15 20. In view of the above stated reasons, we do not find any infirmity or illegality in the common judgment passed by the High Court, setting aside the orders of the learned Single Judge qua grant of interest on the belated payment of pension to the appellants. 21. Therefore, all the Appeals are devoid of merits and are accordingly dismissed. However, there is no order as to costs. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

--- JUDGMENT 22 ---
22. Before parting, we wish to observe that each party should present truthful and accurate information to the court to facilitate fair adjudication. Such information should be provided in the form of writing. Relying on the oral instructions may lead to factual errors, misunderstanding / misrepresentations, etc., ultimately compromising the integrity of the judicial process. Misleading representations not only affect the parties involved, but also erode public trust in the judicial system as a whole. The Court should also pass orders only based on the written instructions, so as to enable it to fix the liability on the correct official(s), responsible for any such wrongful representations / instructions. Therefore, it is imperative that the official(s)/counsel(s) appearing before the Court to represent the Government authorities should equip with proper written instructions from the competent authority(ies). Needless to state that if any misrepresentation is made on the part of the parties, in particular, Government16 authorities, the court should not shy away from it, rather act sternly by mulcting with costs on the official(s) who make the same. .....................................J.

--- JUDGMENT 23 ---
2024 INSC 760 NON-REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6274 OF 2013 M/s. Shriram Investments … Appellant versus The Commissioner of Income Tax III Chennai … Respondent J U D G M E N T ABHAY S. OKA, J. FACTUAL ASPECTS 1. The appellant-assessee filed a return of income on 19th November 1989 under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, ‘IT Act’) for the assessment year 1989-90. On 31st October 1990, the appellant filed a revised return. As per intimation issued under Section 143(1)(a) of the IT Act on 27th August 1991, the appellant paid the necessary tax amount. On 29th October 1991, the appellant filed another revised return. The assessing officer did not take cognizance of the said revised return. Therefore, the appellant preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) (for short, ‘CIT (Appeals)’). By the order dated 21st July 1993, the CIT (Appeals) dismissed the appeal on the ground that in view of Section 139(5) of the IT Act, the revised return filed on 29th October 1991 was barred by limitation. Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 Page 1 of 72. Being aggrieved, the appellant-assessee preferred an appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘the Tribunal). The Tribunal partly allowed the appeal by remanding the case back to the file of the assessing officer. The assessing officer was directed to consider the assessee’s claim regarding the deduction of deferred revenue expenditure. The respondent Department preferred an appeal before the High Court of Judicature at Madras. By the impugned judgment, the High Court proceeded to set aside the order of the Tribunal on the ground that after the revised return was barred by time, there was no provision to consider the claim made by the appellant. SUBMISSIONS 3. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has taken us through the orders of the Tribunal and the High Court. He relies upon a decision of this Court in the case of Wipro Finance Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 24 ---
We have carefully considered the submissions made across the bar. We have carefully perused the judgment of this Court in the case of Wipro Finance Ltd1. The issue which arose before this Court was not regarding the power of the assessing officer to consider the claim after the revised return was barred by time. This Court considered the appellate power of the Appellate Tribunal under Section 254 of the IT Act. Paragraphs 10 and 11 of the said decision in the case of Wipro Finance Ltd1 read thus:- “10. The learned ASG appearing for the department had faintly argued that since the appellant in its return had taken a conscious explicit plea with regard to the part of the claim being ascribable to capital expenditure and partly to revenue expenditure, it was not open for the appellant to plead for the first time before the ITAT that the entire claim must be 2 (2006) 157 Taxman 1 (SC) 3 (2022) 446 ITR 1 Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 Page 3 of 7treated as revenue expenditure. Further, it was not open to the ITAT to entertain such fresh claim for the first time. This submission needs to be stated to be rejected. In the first place, the ITAT was conscious about the fact that this claim was set up by the appellant for the first time before it, and was clearly inconsistent and contrary to the stand taken in the return filed by the appellant for the concerned assessment year including the notings made by the officials of the appellant. Yet, the ITAT entertained the claim as permissible, even though for the first time before the ITAT, in appeal under Section 254 of the 1961 Act, by relying on the dictum of this Court in National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. Further, the ITAT has also expressly recorded the no objection given by the representative of the department, allowing the appellant to set up the fresh claim to treat the amount declared as capital expenditure in the returns (as originally filed), as revenue expenditure. As a result, the objection now taken by the department cannot be countenanced.

--- JUDGMENT 25 ---
11. Learned ASG had placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Goetze (India) Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Income Tax in support of the objection pressed before us that it is not open to entertain fresh claim before the ITAT. According to him, the decision in National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. merely permits raising of a new ground concerning the claim already mentioned in the returns and not an inconsistent or contrary plea or a new claim. We are not impressed by this argument. For, the observations in the decision in Goetze (India) Ltd. itself make it amply clear that such limitation would apply to the “assessing authority”, but not impinge upon the plenary powers of the ITAT bestowed under Section 254 of the Act. Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 Page 4 of 7In other words, this decision is of no avail to the department.” (emphasis added) In this case, the Court did not consider the question of the power of the assessing officer to consider a claim made after a revised return was barred by time. This Court considered the appellate powers of the Tribunal under Section 254 of the IT Act. Moreover, this was a case where the department gave no objection for enabling the assessee to set up a fresh claim. 6. In the case of Goetzge (India) Ltd2, this Court held that the assessing officer cannot entertain any claim made by the assessee otherwise than by following the provisions of the IT Act. In this case, there is no dispute that when a revised return dated 29th October 1991 was filed, it was barred by limitation in terms of section 139(5) of the IT Act. 7. Section 139(5) of the IT Act, at the relevant time, read thus: “(5) If any person, having furnished a return under sub-section (1), or in pursuance of a notice issued under sub-section (1) of section 142, discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he may furnish a revised return at any time before the expiry of one year from the end of the relevant assessment year or before the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier: Provided that where the return relates to the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, or any earlier assessment year, the reference to one year aforesaid shall be construed as a Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 Page 5 of 7reference to two years from the end of the relevant assessment year.” (emphasis added) In the case of Wipro Limited3, in paragraph no.9, this Court held thus: “9. In such a situation, filing a revised return under section 139(5) of the Income-tax Act claiming carrying forward of losses subsequently would not help the assessee. In the present case, the assessee filed its original return under section 139(1) and not under section 139(3). Therefore, the Revenue is right in submitting that the revised return filed by the assessee under section 139(5) can only substitute its original return under section 139(1) and cannot transform it into a return under section 139(3), in order to avail of the benefit of carrying forward or set-off of any loss under section 80 of the Income-tax Act. The assessee can file a revised return in a case where there is an omission or a wrong statement. But a revised return of income, under section 139(5) cannot be filed, to withdraw the claim and subsequently claiming the carried forward or setoff of any loss. Filing a revised return under section 139(5) of the Income-tax Act and taking a contrary stand and/or claiming the exemption, which was specifically not claimed earlier while filing the original return of income is not permissible. By filing the revised return of income, the assessee cannot be permitted to substitute the original return of income filed under section 139(1) of the Income-tax Act. Therefore, claiming benefit under section 10B(8) and furnishing the declaration as required under section 10B(8) in the revised return of income which was much after the due date of filing the original return of income under section 139(1) of the Income-tax Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 Page 6 of 7Act, cannot mean that the assessee has complied with the condition of furnishing the declaration before the due date of filing the original return of income under section 139(1) of the Act. As observed hereinabove, for claiming the benefit under section 10B(8), both the conditions of furnishing the declaration and to file the same before the due date of filing the original return of income are mandatory in nature.” 8. Coming to the decision of the Tribunal, we find that the Tribunal has not exercised its power under Section 254 of the IT Act to consider the claim. Instead, the Tribunal directed the assessing officer to consider the appellant's claim. The assessing officer had no jurisdiction to consider the claim made by the assessee in the revised return filed after the time prescribed by Section 139(5) for filing a revised return had already expired. 9. Therefore, we find no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment of the High Court. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. ...…………………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 26 ---
Respondent no. 1 - WFRPL is a wholly owned subsidiary of 1 “SECI”, for short. 2 “APTEL”, for short. 3 “WFRPL”, for short. 1Inox Wind Infrastructure Services Limited4. The parent concern, IWISL, was awarded a total of 250 MW project capacity, in Tranche-I in 5 packets each of 50 MW capacity in terms of the appellant – SECI’s Request for Selection dated 28.10.2016. These projects were to be executed under five different Special Purpose Vehicles5 viz. Wind One Renergy Pvt Ltd (50 MW), Wind Two Renergy Pvt Ltd (50 MW), Wind Three Renergy Pvt Ltd (50 MW), Wind Four Renergy Pvt Ltd (50 MW) and Wind Five Renergy Pvt Ltd (50 MW). Accordingly, respondent no. 1 – WFRPL, a wholly owned subsidiary of IWISL, and respondent no. 3 – Power Trading Company India Limited6 entered into a Power Purchase Agreement7 dated 21.07.2017 to establish a 50 MW wind power unit to generate and supply renewable (wind) power to PTC. The appellant – SECI is the implementing agency for the project, being the nodal agency of the Central Government to promote renewable energy such as solar, wind etc. The Scheduled Commercial Operation Date8/commissioning was 04.10.2018, 18 months from the date of the Letter of Award9 dated 05.04.2017. Further, WFRPL was entitled to an additional time with liquidated damages and reduction in tariff of upto 9 months, that is till 05.07.2019. The commissioning deadline or maximum period allowed for 4 “IWISL”, for short. 5 “SPV”, for short. 6 “PTC”, for short. 7 “PPA”, for short. 8 “SCOD”, for short. 9 “LoA”, for short. 2commissioning was 27 months from the date of LoA. Thus, the maximum period allowed for commissioning was till 05.07.2019. 3. It is an accepted and admitted position that the inter-state transmission licensee – Power Grid Corporation of India Limited was unable to operationalise the Long Term Access10, which was required and necessary to implement and comply with the PPAs. The LTA was subsequently operationalised on 14.04.2019. 4. In terms of the letter dated 22.10.2019 issued by the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, Government of India certain concessions and extension of milestones in wind power projects were granted. As per Clause 2(c) of the said letter, the wind power projects shall be granted extension in scheduled commissioning of the project for a period equal to 60 days, subsequent to operationalisation of LTA. This is the additional time to be provided to the generator/developer to complete the commissioning activities after the inter-state transmission system is ready. 5. It is conceded before us by the appellant that WFRPL would be entitled to extension of the commissioning date till 13.06.2019 on account of the period of 60 days, as stipulated in the letter dated 22.10.2019. Accordingly, the additional time allowed with payment of liquidated damages and the reduction of tariff and the maximum period allowed for commissioning, that is, 9 months and 27 months from the 10 “LTA”, for short. 3date of issue of LoA, will be computed. 6. WFRPL had approached the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission11, 

--- JUDGMENT 27 ---
10. It is an accepted position that there were 5 PPAs of 50 MW each, which have been entered into between the different SPVs wholly owned by IWISL and PTC. This appeal and impugned order relates only to the 5th PPA, that is, the PPA entered into between WFRPL and PTC. WFRPL has not been able to operationalise this PPA by commissioning the wind power generation units. The four other PPAs of the SPVs of IWISL have been operationalised. 11. We have on record a letter of WFRPL dated 25.03.2019, stating that the project was at an advance stage of completion and WFRPL shall be able to commission the project on or before 31.05.2019, subject to readiness of evacuation system. By another letter dated 25.04.2019 written by IWISL, the parent concern of WFRPL, IWISL had stated that the evacuation systems have been made ready for power evacuation with effect from 14.04.2019. Further, IWISL had stated that WFRPL shall be able to operationalise and commission the 5th power station by 30.06.2019. However, as accepted before us by WFRPL, the 5th power generation unit has not been operationalised even today. 12. Even otherwise, once WFRPL became aware and had knowledge that LTA was functional, and they had been granted benefit of 60 days in terms of the letter dated 22.10.2019 and 132 days in terms of the order of the CERC, the direction that the period of 132 days shall commence from the date the 5APTEL order is irrational. The objective and purpose of timelines is to ensure early supply of green energy and reduction of carbon footprint. Tariffs of green energy, it is well known, have come down substantially.

--- JUDGMENT 28 ---
13. In view of the aforesaid position, we set aside the impugned judgment dated 11.01.2022. The order dated 08.03.2021 passed by the CERC is restored and will operate and bind the parties. 14. We are informed that pursuant to the impugned judgment, the appellant – SECI had refunded Rs.10 crores to WFRPL, SECI having encashed the performance bank guarantee. The appellant - SECI would be entitled to recover the said amount along with simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date when the payment was made till the amount is refunded by WFRPL. In case the payment of Rs.10 crores along with interest as directed, is not refunded within six months from the order dated 27.02.202412, the appellant - SECI will be entitled to recover Rs. 10 crores plus interest as per the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. Thus, in case of default and non-payment within the time stipulated, the principal amount of Rs.10 crores, as well as, simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum accrued thereon, will be treated as electricity dues and accordingly be recovered along with interest, as applicable, in accordance with the Electricity Act, 2003 and the applicable rules. 12 As modified/corrected by this order dated 16th October, 2024.

--- JUDGMENT 29 ---
Respondent no. 1 - WFRPL and respondent no. 3 – Power Trading Company India Limited16 had entered into five Power Purchase Agreements17 dated 21.07.2017. Vide each of the said PPA, WFRPL had agreed to establish a 50 MW wind power unit and generate to supply renewable (wind) power to PTC. The 13 “SECI”, for short. 14 “APTEL”, for short. 15 “WFRPL”, for short. 16 “PTC”, for short. 17 “PPA”, for short. 8appellant – SECI is the implementing agency for the project, being the nodal agency of the Central Government to promote renewable energy such as solar, wind etc. The Scheduled Commercial Operation Date18/commissioning was 04.10.2018, 18 months from the date of the Letter of Award19 dated 05.04.2017. Further, WFRPL was entitled to an additional time with liquidated damages and reduction in tariff of upto 9 months, that is till 05.07.2019. The commissioning deadline or maximum period allowed for commissioning was 27 months from the date of LoA. Thus, the maximum period allowed for commissioning was till 05.07.2019. 3. It is an accepted and admitted position that the inter-state transmission licensee – Power Grid Corporation of India Limited was unable to operationalise the Long Term Access20, which was required and necessary to implement and comply with the PPAs. The LTA was subsequently operationalised on 14.04.2019. 4. In terms of the letter dated 22.10.2019 issued by the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, Government of India certain concessions and extension of milestones in wind power projects were granted. As per Clause 2(c) of the said letter, the wind power projects shall be granted extension in scheduled commissioning of the project for a period equal to 60 days, subsequent to operationalisation of LTA. This is the additional time to be provided to the 18 “SCOD”, for short. 19 “LoA”, for short. 20 “LTA”, for short. 9generator/developer to complete the commissioning activities after the inter-state transmission system is ready. 5. It is conceded before us by the appellant that WFRPL would be entitled to extension of the commissioning date till 13.06.2019 on account of the period of 60 days, as stipulated in the letter dated 22.10.2019. Accordingly, the additional time allowed with payment of liquidated damages and the reduction of tariff and the maximum period allowed for commissioning, that is, 9 months and 27 months from the date of issue of LoA, will be computed. 6. WFRPL had approached the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission21, 

--- JUDGMENT 30 ---
13. In view of the aforesaid position, we set aside the impugned judgment dated 11.01.2022. The order dated 08.03.2021 passed by the CERC is restored and will operate and bind the parties. 14. We are informed that pursuant to the impugned judgment, the appellant – SECI had refunded Rs.10 crores to WFRPL, SECI having encashed the performance bank guarantee. The appellant - SECI would be entitled to recover the said amount along with simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date when the payment was made till the amount is refunded by WFRPL. In case the payment of Rs.10 crores along with interest as directed, is not refunded within six months from the date of this order, the appellant 12- SECI will be entitled to recover Rs. 10 crores plus interest as per the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. Thus, in case of default and non-payment within the time stipulated, the principal amount of Rs.10 crores, as well as, simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum accrued thereon, will be treated as electricity dues and accordingly be recovered along with interest, as applicable, in accordance with the Electricity Act, 2003 and the applicable rules. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 31 ---
A brief conspectus of the facts is as follows. The appellant is a statutory body under the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, and is under the administrative control of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Government of India. As it was providing warehousing facilities, the respondent, a company engaged in the business of trading ceramic tiles and sanitary ware, had approached the appellant for storage of its goods. The appellant agreed and provided a storage space of 1295 sq. mtrs. and possession of this space was handed over to the respondent on 12.09.2012, even before an agreement could be entered between the parties. 4. Lease agreement on 26.09.2012 governing the contractual relationship provided under Clause 1 that the space will remain with the respondent for a period of 3 years from 12.09.2012. Thus, the contract was due to expire by efflux of time by 11.09.2015. This lease was made subject to a ‘renewal by mutual consent’ as per Clause 2. The rate of storage was fixed at Rs. 131 per square meter per month. What is relevant for us is Clause 16 of the agreement, incorporating the arbitration clause. 1 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1754 25. Even before the expiry of the lease, the storage charges were said to have been revised on a pan India basis w.e.f. 01.11.2012. The revision of the storage charges was communicated to the respondent and by a letter dated 04.10.2012, a demand for enhanced payment w.e.f. 01.11.2012 was raised. The appellant renewed the said demand on 10.05.2013 and 31.12.2014 and intimated that if the amount is not paid, it will be inferred that the respondent is not interested in retaining the facility. While the matter was pending, the storage charges were further revised w.e.f. 01.04.2015 by a letter dated 05.03.2015 when the respondent was informed that the tariff will be at the rate of Rs.177/- per sq. mtr.

--- JUDGMENT 32 ---
6. In turn, the respondent is said to have intimated the appellant that it is interested in continuing the facility but sought renewal of the agreement dated 26.09.2012 by also committing that any arrears due as per the original agreement would be cleared. 7. On 16.09.2015, the appellant is supposed to have rejected the request for renewal of the agreement and has in turn raised a demand of Rs. 16,10,004/. In view of the fact that the respondent had not vacated the premises despite the lease’s expiry on 11.09.2015, the appellant invoked the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter the Public Premises Act). 38. It is an admitted fact that even before the order of the Estate Officer under the Public Premises Act could be passed, the respondent is said to have vacated the premises on 13.11.2015. The Estate Officer any way passed his order on 31.12.2015 holding that the respondent was in unauthorised possession only from 11.09.2015 (i.e. when the lease expired) to 13.11.2015 (when premises were vacated) and also directed payment of certain dues as indicated in the demand notice. 9. It is in the above referred background that the respondent invoked arbitration by filing an application under Section 11(6) of the Act for the appointment of an arbitrator in view of a subsisting arbitration clause in the agreement. The said clause is as under: “16. All disputes and differences arising out of or in any way touching upon or concerning this agreement whatsoever shall be referred to the sole Arbitration of any person appointed by the Managing Director, Central Warehousing Corporation New Delhi. The Award of such Arbitrator shall be final and binding on the Parties to this agreement. It is a term of this agreement that in the event of such arbitrator to whom the matter is originally referred / being transferred or vacating his office or being unable to act for any reason the Central Warehousing Corporation at that time shall appoint any other person to act as Arbitrator in accordance with the terms of this agreement. Such person shall be entitled to proceed with the reference from the stage at which it was left by his predecessors. The Arbitrator shall give a speaking award. The venue of Arbitration shall be at such place as may be fixed by the Arbitrator at his sole discretion. The cost of arbitration shall be borne by the parties as per the decision of the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator shall give separate award respect of each dispute or difference referred him, 4In to Subject as aforesaid, the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to the Arbitration proceedings under this clause.” 10. The application under Section 11 specifically speaks about the dispute that has arisen under the agreement dated 26.09.2012. Broadly, they relate to the right of renewal of the contract and also the legality and propriety of the revision of rates during the subsistence of the agreement. 11. The High Court considered the matter in detail and came to the conclusion that the claims made in the notice followed by the application under Section 11 are clearly covered by the arbitration clause. The relevant portions of the High Court Judgment is as under: “12. On going through the same, it is seen that as per the said clause all disputes and differences arising out of or in any way touching upon or concerning the agreement have to be referred to the sole arbitration of any person appointed by the Managing Director of the Corporation. Award of such arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to the agreement. The arbitrator shall also decide the venue of arbitration and the cost of arbitration shall be borne by the parties as per the decision of the arbitrator. The arbitrator is required to give separate award in respect of each dispute or difference referred to him. Thus, the crucial words in Clause 16 are "all disputes and differences arising out of or in any way touching upon or concerning the agreement. According to the petitioner, the agreement for dedicated warehousing entered into between the parties on 26.09.2012 clearly mentioned the rate of storage charge i.e. Rs. 131-00 per square meter per month. But the Corporation unilaterally enhanced the storage charge rate with effect from 01.11.2012 at the gross area rate of Rs.157-00 per Square meter per month and net area rate of Rs.216-00 per square meter per month. 513. The second area of dispute is with regard to extension of the agreement for dedicated warehousing. As per Clause No 1 the period of dedicated warehousing was for three years with effect from 12.09.2012, but both the parties had the option of renewing the agreement for a further period as mutually agreed upon on expiry of the term of the agreement. It is on these two issues that notice of arbitration was given to the Managing Director of the Corporation by the petitioner on 23.09.2015. As per the postal tracking (page32 of the paper book), the same was delivered on 26.09.2015. In any case respondent has not disputed receipt of the notice. According to the respondent, it is not an arbitral dispute being beyond the agreement.” 12. Questioning the judgment and order passed by the High Court, referring the dispute to arbitration, the appellant filed the present appeal. Though the question relating to whether the Public Premises Act will override the Arbitration Act has been raised and argued before the High Court. This court issued notice in the special leave petition on the basis of the question so formulated. We could have dismissed the special leave petition on this very ground but as notice was issued on this point and the appeal has been pending for some time, we considered it appropriate to hear the appellant on this question and decide the case. We will first answer the issue relating to the applicability of the Public Premises Act. 13. Re: Whether the Public Premises Act, 1971 overrides the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996: This submission has to fail. The reasons are simple and straight forward. The dispute that is raised in the 6Section 11 application relate to promises and reciprocal promises arising out of the agreement dated 26.09.2012. The right of renewal as well as the legality and propriety of the enhanced demand arose during the subsistence of the agreement. It will be on the interpretation, construction and the obligations arising out of the agreement that the respondent’s claim rests. On the other hand, The Public Premises Act authorises the ejectment of a tenant in unauthorised occupation of public premises and for consequential directions. The original lease as it were, validly subsisted till 11.09.2015 and the dispute between the parties related to the period commencing from 12.09.2012 to 11.09.2015, when the lease expired. The Public Premises Act would not even cast a shadow on this period. In so far as the dispute relating to this right of renewal is concerned, it depends on the terms of the agreement. The Public Premises Act neither bars nor overlaps with the scope and ambit of proceedings that were initiated under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. 14. Whether the High Court committed any error in appointing the arbitrator while exercising the jurisdiction under Section 11: We have already extracted the relevant portion of the order passed by the High Court. The revision of storage charges occurred during the subsistence of the contract. Its legality and propriety will depend on the terms of the agreement dated 26.09.2012. Similarly, the right of renewal will 7also be based on and a construct of the said agreement. These two disputes will undoubtedly arise out of the agreement between the parties and the resolution of such disputes is clearly covered by the arbitration clause (Cl. 16 of the agreement). After the recent decision of this court in SBI General Insurance Co. (supra) the remit of the referral court to consider an application under Section 11(6) is clear and unambiguous. We need to just examine the existence of an arbitration agreement. The context is clearly delineated in paras 110-111 and 114 of the judgment which are extracted below for ready reference. “110. The scope of examination under Section 11(6-A) is confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 7. The examination of validity of the arbitration agreement is also limited to the requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the agreement should be in writing. 111. The use of the term ‘examination’ under Section 11(6-A) as distinguished from the use of the term ‘rule’ under Section 16 implies that the scope of enquiry under section 11(6-A) is limited to a prima facie scrutiny of the existence of the arbitration agreement, and does not include a contested or laborious enquiry, which is left for the arbitral tribunal to ‘rule’ under Section 16. The prima facie view on existence of the arbitration agreement taken by the referral court does not bind either the arbitral tribunal or the court enforcing the arbitral award. […] 114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re : Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement, and nothing else.[…]” (emphasis supplied) 15. For the reasons stated above, we have no hesitation in rejecting the petition and we further hold that the appellant must bear the costs for this unnecessary litigation which we quantify at Rs. 50,000/-.

--- JUDGMENT 33 ---
2024 INSC 763 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023] SHASHI BHUSHAN ...APPELLANT(S) PRASAD SINGH VERSUS THE STATE OF BIHAR ...RESPONDENT(S) AND OTHERS WITH CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 8967 of 2023] CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 10359 of 2023] CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 18369 of 2023] CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 22215 of 2023] SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 1 of 19J U D G M E N T SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 1. Leave Granted. 2. The present batch of appeals arise out of judgement dated 16.02.2023, passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 3411/2022 (‘CWJC’) along with other connected matters (the ‘Impugned Order’), whereby the Writ Petitioners who were the unsuccessful candidates in the Recruitment Process conducted pursuant to the Advertisement dated 08.03.2019 for the post of Junior Engineer (Civil), had challenged the vires of Rule 9(1)(ii) of the Bihar Water Resources Department Subordinate Engineering (Civil) Cadre Recruitment (Amendment) Rules 2017, published vide notification dated 07.11.2017, prescribing technical qualification eligibility for selection/appointment to the technical post in the State of Bihar. The appellants before this Court are the successful candidates in the said Recruitment Process. 3. The present matter begins with the issuance of Advertisement No. 01/2019 dated 08.03.2019 by the Bihar Technical Service Commission (‘BTSC’) inviting applications for 6,379 vacancies to the post of Junior Engineer across various state departments (the ‘Advertisement’). The Advertisement SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 2 of 19specified that the educational qualification required for the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) as under: “Educational Eligibility. a) Junior Engineer (Civil) i. Diploma-in-Civil Engineering conferred by the concerned Technical Educational Council/University recognised by All India Council of Technical Education, New Delhi. ii. Diploma-in-Civil Engineering through non- distance mode conferred by the concerned Deemed University established under the UGC Act provided the Deemed University is duly approved by the University Grants Commission for the said Course.” It is pertinent to note that this requirement is drawn from and is identical to Rule 9(1)(iii) of the Bihar Water Resources Department Subordinate Engineering (Civil) Cadre Recruitment Rules, 2015 (the ‘Rules’) as amended in 2017. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 34 ---
The private Respondents in the present appeal were the Writ Petitioners before the High Court. They were all applicants who possessed a Diploma from Private Universities/Institutions established by statute and approved by the University Grants Commission. Their applications were found ineligible by the BTSC on the ground that their institutions were not approved by the All-India Council of Technical Education (‘AICTE’). Aggrieved, they approached the High Court seeking the quashing of Rule 9(1)(iii) of the Rules as being inconsistent with other SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 3 of 19statutory provisions and judgement of the Apex Court in Bharathidasan University & Anr. vs. AICTE & Ors. 2001 (8) SCC 676 wherein, on an interpretation of the provisions of the All-India Council of Technical Education Act 1987, it was held that Universities are excluded from the purview of technical institutions and are thus not required to obtain approvals from the AICTE before introducing technical courses/programs. 5. The Writ Petitioners relied on public notice dated 09.02.2022 issued by the AICTE, to the VCs of all Central/State and Private Universities about AICTE approval for 2022-23, stating as follows: “Dear Sir/Madam, lt is intimated that Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in case of Bharathidasan University & Another Vs AICTE & Others has interpreted the provisions of the AICTE Act and has held that university do not require prior approval of AICTE to commence a new department of course and programmes in technical education. Universities have obligation or duty to conform to the standards and norms laid down by the AICTE. For the purpose of ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards, AICTE may cause an inspection of the university, which has to be as per the provisions under relevant rules/regulations of the AICTE. Further, all affiliated institutions running technical education programmes requires prior approval of AICTE. However, it has been observed that some of the Central / State / Private Universities are taking partial approval of AICTE for some selected Technical Courses / SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 4 of 19Programmes, which is creating confusion among the stakeholders. Therefore, AICTE decided that no partial approval of technical courses will be given to Universities in order to avoid confusion among stakeholders. Accordingly, all universities are hereby informed that either they take full approval of all technical courses, or they can continue without approval of AICTE.” 6. It is relevant to note that the stand of the Writ Petitioners was reinforced by the AICTE before the High Court, as made explicit by their Counter Affidavit dated 12.05.2022, which read as under: “8. That so far the statements made in paragraph no. 15 of the writ petition concern it is submitted that AICTE vide its public notification for approval process 2021-22 had categorically clarified that the central/state public private universities are not required to take approval of the AICTE for technical programs except ODL and online courses. This position has also been confirmed in the public notice issued for approval process 2022-23…………..” 7. At this stage, it is apposite to observe that prior to the filing of CWJC No. 3411/2022, the High Court was already hearing several analogous writs challenging different provisions of the Rules as applicable to the selection process under the Advertisement. Accordingly, vide order dated 02.05.2019 passed in CWJC No. 9887/2019, the BTSC was permitted to continue the selection process, with the results to be kept in a sealed cover, SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 5 of 19pending the outcome of the proceedings. This order was later modified vide order dated 06.12.2019 in CWJC No. 21651/2018 whereby the High Court allowed the selection process to be completed but directed that all orders of appointments must state that appointments are subject to the outcome of the writ petitions and therefore, the selected candidates cannot claim any equity. 8. Accordingly, on 02.04.2022, the BTSC published its selection list for the posts advertised under the Advertisement (‘Select List’) and the selected candidates were also allotted to specific departments. In compliance with the aforenoted interim orders, the Select List reproduced the directions given by the Court in order dated 06.12.2019 and explicitly stated that the Select List shall be affected in light of the final order in the pending proceedings. 9.

--- JUDGMENT 35 ---
Thereafter, in a separate analogous writ proceeding being CWJC No. 7312/2021, vide order dated 19.04.2022, Rule 4(A) of the Rules which granted 40% institutional reservation to diploma holders from State-run Polytechnic Institutes was found to be arbitrary and unreasonable. Consequently, Select list prepared in terms of Rule 4(A) was set aside and the BTSC was directed to prepare a fresh select list granting 40% institutional reservation to diploma holders from any polytechnic institute, SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 6 of 19recognized by the AICTE and affiliated with the State Board of Technical Institutions, Bihar and located within the State. 10. Following this, the BTSC proceeded to finalise the merit list under the Advertisement but were directed by the High Court vide order 01.12.2022 in CWJC No. 7761/2022 to withhold the declaration of results until leave is granted by the Court. A list was prepared on 19.12.2022, put under sealed cover and permission of the Court was sought by filing an interlocutory application in CWJC No. 7761/2022 (the ‘Final Select List’). The hearing of the application was adjourned after the Advocate General informed the Court that the State Government was contemplating a review of the entire process. 11. On 25.01.2023, the Govt. of Bihar convened a high-level meeting of Secretaries from different works departments to consider the legal issues emerging from the numerous pending litigations against the Rules and the Advertisement and the consequent 4-year delay in appointments. A decision was taken inter alia to cancel the appointment process under the Advertisement and to initiate approval for the amended Rules. 12. Once the decision dated 25.01.2023 was brought on record before the High Court, the State Govt. was permitted to implement its decisions dated 25.01.2023 and the Court concluded that nothing remained in the matter. Accordingly, SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 7 of 19CWJC No. 3411/2022 and all other analogous writs were disposed of in the following manner: “In the instant writ petitions, petitioners have prayed for the following relief/reliefs: i. For quashing of Rule 9(1)(ii) of Rules “Bihar Water Resources Department Subordinate Engineering (Civil) Cadre Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 2017 contained in Notification no. 3950 dated 07.11.2017 prescribing technical qualification eligibility for selection/appointment to the technical post in the State of Bihar, as being inconsistent with other statutory provisions, in contravention of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s judgment and is violative of fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India. ii. For declaration of the aforesaid rules as being ultra vires to the Constitution of India so far amendment of Rule -9(1)(iii) is concerned. iii. For any other relief/reliefs to which the petitioner is found entitled to. 2. Matter is relating to selection and appointment to the post of Junior Engineer. In this regard, advertisement was issued on 08.03.2019. From time to time, matter was taken up for hearing and during the course of the hearing we have noticed certain errors in the relevant Rules governing the post of Junior Engineer. Ultimately, State Government has taken a decision to cancel the process of recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer with reference to advertisement issued on 08.03.2019 and proposed to issue a fresh or amendment of Rules while rectifying certain errors which have crept SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 36 ---
Page 8 of 19in the existing Rules. To that effect, supplementary counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 4 while enclosing decision dated 25.01.2023 vide Annexure – A to the supplementary counter affidavit. Perusal of the same, it is evident that certain errors which have crept in the Rules would be carried in amendment of relevant Rules etc. The proposed action of the State respondents reads as under: ‘4. After due deliberations on all aspects, it was resolved that: a. In view of the legal wrangle crept in presently, the Recruitment process emanating from the Advertisement No.01/2019 notified by the Bihar Technical Service Commission be cancelled. b. The Department which earlier send its requisition for appointment to the Commission shall withdraw their respective requisition from the Bihar Technical Service Commission and such Department would send their such requisition afresh only after framing of new Recruitment Rules. c. Action be also initiated for cancellation of the Junior Engineer Recruitments Rules which are presently in vogue in various departments and thereafter, the amended Junior Engineer Recruitments Rules be framed. d. Steps be taken as to the approval of the Council of Ministers be accorded to the amended junior Engineer Recruitment Rules for the appointment of the Junior Engineer.’ 3. In the light of these new developments, the present petitions do not survive for consideration. Accordingly, State is permitted to carry out necessary amendment and proceed afresh to advertise for the post of Junior Engineer. SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 37 ---
Anit Kumar Das (2021) 12 SCC 80 and The Chairman SBI & Anr. vs. M.J. James (2022) 2 SCC 301. 14. The learned counsels for the Appellants also contended that the cancellation of the entire selection process after its completion and preparation of the Final Select List, is unjustified SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 10 of 19and amounts to changing the rules of the game after the declaration of results, which is impermissible. Reliance is placed on K. Manjusree vs. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr. (2008) 3 SCC 512. It is argued that the Appellants, who emerged successful after the due process of selection which was carried out as per the Advertisement, have a vested right to be appointed and are instead being made to suffer though no fault of their own. 15. They further contended that the decision taken by the State Government and approved by the High Court amounts to arbitrary action as it fails to specify the concern/anomaly with Rule 9(1)(iii) which necessitated the cancellation of the entire process. 16. Learned Counsel for the Private Respondents i.e., the Writ Petitioners before the High Court also contended that the cancellation of the entire selection process, at such a tardy stage would seriously impact their interests. They argue that as per the stand of the AICTE before the High Court, their applications were eligible and should thus be reconsidered along with the applications of the Appellants. 17. Learned Senior Counsel for the State, Mr. Patwalia vehemently contends that the State was well within its domain to scrap the selection process considering the numerous legal issues that cropped up concerning the previously applicable Rules. It is SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 11 of 19brought to the notice of this Court that in furtherance of its decisions, as approved by the Impugned Order, the Govt. of Bihar has repealed the existing Rules and notified the Bihar Subordinate Engineering (Civil/Mechanical/Electrical) Cadre Rules, 2023 (the ‘New Rules’) vide Notification No. 1174 dated 07.03.2023. In compliance with the directions of the High Court, appropriate provisions for the grant of one-time age relaxations have also been made under Rule 8(2) of the New Rules. Further, the BTSC has cancelled the Advertisement vide notice dated 10.04.2023 and fresh requisitions have been sent by the Water Resources Department to the BTSC vide letter dated 21.03.2023 for selection against 2252 vacant posts for Junior Engineers in that department. 18.

--- JUDGMENT 38 ---
Mr. Patwalia further contends that the completion of the selection process under the Advertisement, resulting in the Select List and in the Final Select List was consistently carried out with the rider that the appointments would be subject to the outcome of the pending litigation. He argues that while the Select List was partially set aside by the High Court vide order dated 19.04.2022, the Final Select List was neither considered by the High Court nor published, and therefore, no right to appointment vests with the Appellants, making any claim to equity untenable. SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 12 of 1919. At this stage, it is pertinent to note that while issuing notice, this Court vide order dated 24.04.2023 directed the maintenance of status quo which has persisted till date. As per the most recent status report by the State, nearly 9,187 posts of Junior Engineers remain vacant, drastically affecting the day-to-day functioning of the State. As retirements are ongoing, the working strength is continuously decreasing and is currently at 11.7%. In recognition of the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, Mr. Patwalia has fairly stated before this Court that the State will abide by any appropriate direction given by the Court. 20. We have heard Learned Counsel for the parties and perused the record. 21.

--- JUDGMENT 39 ---
As evidenced above, the present case has a chequered history. Before the Advertisement was released, an amendment was brought to the Rules in 2017, more particularly to Rule 9, which restricted the eligibility criteria only to those candidates who possessed a Diploma from an institute approved by the AICTE. This amendment was prima facie contrary to the decision of this Court in Bharathidasan University (supra) which is solidified by the stand of the AICTE before this Court and their public notice dated 19.02.2022. However, despite this infraction, the Advertisement contained the same restriction, SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 13 of 19arbitrarily disqualifying persons like the Writ Petitioners from the selection process. 22. Thereafter, the first Select List that was prepared was partly set aside vide order dated 19.04.2022 in CWJC No. 7312/2021 and the BTSC was directed to prepare a fresh Select List as under: “Accordingly, appointments made to extent in terms of Rule 4(A) of amending Rules, 2017 are set aside and the Bihar State Technical Selection Commission is directed to prepare afresh select/merit list granting 40% institutional reservation to all the diploma holders, who have obtained their diploma certificate from any polytechnic institutes recognized by AICTU and affiliated by State Board of Technical Institutions, Bihar, Patna within the State of Bihar.” 23. Consequently, the Select List prepared on 02.04.2022 was impliedly set aside and a Final Select List was prepared by the BTSC in compliance with order dated 19.04.2022 but the same was not released as ordered by the Patna High Court vide order dated 01.12.2022 in another analogous writ proceeding being CWJC No. 7761/2022 as under: “…Process of selection and appointment, in terms of advertisement dated 8.9.2019, is nearing completion. Under these circumstances, as prayed for, we grant two weeks’ time to file reply. In the meanwhile, process of selection may carry on, but the result shall not be declared without leave of the Court.” SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 40 ---
Page 14 of 1924. It is pertinent to note that the order dated 19.04.2022 passed in CWJC No. 7312 of 2021 does not appear to have been challenged further and has attained finality. It is stated by the BTSC that the Final Select List was prepared and kept under sealed cover. While an application seeking release of the list was pending before the High Court, the Writ Petition was withdrawn. 25. During the present proceedings, vide order dated 10.09.2024, this Court sought information regarding the Final Select List from the State Government and the same was produced before this Court in sealed cover. 26. Presently, despite the preparation of the Final Select List which signals the conclusion of the appointment process, the State Government seeks to scrap the entire process and undertake a fresh appointment process under the New Rules. In the considered opinion of this Court, this amounts to effectively changing the rules of the game after the game was played which is impermissible and deprives the candidates of their legitimate right of consideration under the previous Rules. 27. The High Court in the impugned order has abruptly and without assigning reasons and without adjudicating any issues involved in the writ petitions, disposed of the same, recording the statement made by the learned counsel for the State, and SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 15 of 19permitted the State to amend Rules in question. Since, the entire recruitment process was concluded as per the extant Rules till the selection list was declared on 02.04.2022, which has not been specifically set aside by the High Court, and since the AICTE has also continued its stand that its approval is not necessary for the private institutions, and since the order dated 19.04.2022 passed in CWJC No. 7312/2021 has attained finality, in our opinion, the interest of justice would be met if the State/Commission is directed to prepare a fresh select list of meritorious candidates in respect of the Advertisement dated 08.03.2019, keeping in view the above facts and keeping in view that no appointments to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) have been made since last more than ten years. Hence, it is required to be directed that a fresh selection list for the vacancies advertised in the Advertisement dated 08.03.2019 be prepared of the meritorious candidates, considering the above observations and in compliance with the order dated 19.04.2022 passed by the High Court in CWJC No. 7312/2021 as expedient as possible and preferably within three months of this order.

--- JUDGMENT 41 ---
28. In this regard, the field is held by the three-judge bench decision of this Court in K. Manjusree (supra) wherein the Court, relying on previous decisions, explicitly held that introducing new requirements into the selection process after the entire selection process was completed amounted to changing the rules SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 16 of 19of the game after the game was played. Relevant portions of the judgement are reproduced as under: “27. But what could not have been done was the second change, by introduction of the criterion of minimum marks for the interview. The minimum marks for interview had never been adopted by the Andhra Pradesh High Court earlier for selection of District & Sessions Judges, (Grade II). In regard to the present selection, the Administrative Committee merely adopted the previous procedure in vogue. The previous procedure as stated above was to apply minimum marks only for written examination and not for the oral examination. We have referred to the proper interpretation of the earlier Resolutions dated 24-7- 2001 and 21-2-2002 and held that what was adopted on 30-11-2004 was only minimum marks for written examination and not for the interviews. Therefore, introduction of the requirement of minimum marks for interview, after the entire selection process (consisting of written examination and interview) was completed, would amount to changing the rules of the game after the game was played which is clearly impermissible. We are fortified in this view by several decisions of this Court.

--- JUDGMENT 42 ---
It is sufficient to refer to three of them — P.K. Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India [(1984) 2 SCC 141 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 214] , Umesh Chandra Shukla v. Union of India [(1985) 3 SCC 721 : 1985 SCC (L&S) 919] and Durgacharan Misra v. State of Orissa [(1987) 4 SCC 646 : 1988 SCC (L&S) 36 : (1987) 5 ATC 148] 32. In Maharashtra SRTC v. Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve [(2001) 10 SCC 51 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 720] this Court observed that “the rules of the game, meaning thereby, that the criteria for selection cannot be altered by the authorities concerned in the middle or after the process of selection has commenced”. In this case the position is much more serious. Here, not only the rules SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 17 of 19of the game were changed, but they were changed after the game had been played and the results of the game were being awaited. That is unacceptable and impermissible.” 29. Therefore, in light of the aforenoted position, the State action of scrapping the entire selection process is not permissible. In view of the peculiar circumstances of this case, particularly the prolonged pendency leading to huge number of vacant posts that hinder the Government’s functioning, this Court finds it appropriate for the State/BTSC to proceed with the Fresh Select List submitted in compliance with the order dated 19.04.2022 in CWJC No. 7312/2021 which has attained finality, as also taking into consideration as far as possible, the interest of the candidates who were found successful. Hence, the Fresh Select List must be appropriately revised in the following manner: (i) The Fresh Select List be prepared in view of order dated 19.04.2022 passed by the High Court in CWJC No. 7312/2021. (ii) The Fresh Select List shall also include as far as possible those meritorious candidates who were otherwise eligible but were declared ineligible solely on account of the 2017 amendment to the Rules i.e., on account of their institute not being recognised by the AICTE, and all similarly placed successful candidates. SLP (Civil) No. 7257 of 2023 & Ors. Page 18 of 19(iii) The BTSC is directed to prepare the Revised Select List within 3 months of this Order and the State Government is directed to act upon the Revised Select List submitted by the Commission within a period of 30 days thereafter. 30.

--- JUDGMENT 43 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 820 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9739-40 OF 2011 NISAR AHMAD & ORS. APPELLANT(S) VERSUS SAMI ULLAH (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. & ANR. RESPONDENT(S) WITH CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 194 OF 2022 J U D G M E N T UJJAL BHUYAN, J. Heard learned counsel for the parties. 2. The two appeals by special leave are directed against the judgment and order dated 05.01.2009 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 (Nisar Ahmad and Ors. Vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation, Sultanpur and Ors.) and in Writ Petition No.18 of 1975 (Sami Ullah and Anr. Vs. Nisar Ahmed and Ors.). By the aforesaid judgment and order dated 05.01.2009, Civil Misc. Writ Petition No.6635 of 1974 was dismissed and Writ Petition No.18 of 1975 has been allowed.2 3. By order dated 27.04.2009, this Court had issued notice on the special leave petition as well as on the prayer for interim relief. Subsequently, by order dated 15.01.2010, both the parties were directed to maintain status quo prevailing as on 15.01.2010. Thereafter, by order dated 03.11.2011, leave was granted directing the status quo order to be continued in the meantime. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 44 ---
At the outset, it may be useful to make a brief reference to the relevant facts. Zahoor Ahmed, son of Abdul Shakoor, father of the appellants, had moved the Consolidation Officer, Sultanpur under Section 9(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 (briefly ‘the 1953 Act’ hereinafter) raising a dispute as to Khata Nos. 99 and 100 of village Bhati Jarouli of Miranpur, District Sultanpur, U.P., recorded in the name of respondent Sami Ullah and others. Zahoor Ahmed claimed co-tenancy in both the Khatas to the extent of half share. Since the dispute could not be reconciled, he approached the Consolidation Officer. After notice and hearing, the Consolidation Officer passed an order dated 06.12.1972 directing that the name of Zahoor Ahmed be entered as a co-tenant in Khata No. 99 and accordingly partition be made. The shares of Sami Ullah and another (respondents herein) were determined to the extent of 1/4 each. However, the claim of Zahoor3 Ahmed of co-tenancy qua Khata No. 100 was rejected. Accordingly, direction was issued to intimate the parties and to correct the areas of the land in respect of the parties so determined by the Consolidation Officer. 5. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 06.12.1972, respondents Sami Ullah and others filed appeals before the Assistant Settlement Officer under Section 11(1) of the 1953 Act. Similarly, Zahoor Ahmed also filed an appeal under Section 11(1) of the 1953 Act against the said order dated 06.12.1972 rejecting his claim qua Khata No. 100. By order dated 25.04.1973, the appellate authority i.e. the Assistant Settlement Officer, Sultanpur dismissed all the appeals. In other words, order of the Consolidation Officer dated 06.12.1972 was upheld. 6. Thereafter, respondents Sami Ullah and others filed a revision application before the Deputy Director of Consolidation, Gorakhpur (‘Deputy Director’, hereinafter). Likewise, the legal heirs of Zahoor Ahmed, Nisar Ahmed and others (‘appellants’ herein) also filed revision before the Deputy Director against rejection of their appeal. By the order dated 20.09.1974, the Deputy Director opined that Zahoor Ahmed was not entitled to get share in the above Khatas and accordingly the order of the4 Consolidation Officer as affirmed by the Assistant Settlement Officer i.e. the appellate authority was modified. Deputy Director while dismissing the revision of Zahoor Ahmed, Nisar Ahmed and others allowed the revision of the respondent Sami Ullah and others. 7.

--- JUDGMENT 45 ---
Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 was dismissed and Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975 was allowed. 8. It is this judgment and order dated 05.01.2009 which came to be assailed in the related special leave petitions and upon leave being granted, the present civil appeals came to be registered.5 9. While learned counsel for the appellants has contended that the High Court was not justified in upholding the order passed by the Deputy Director in revision thereby adversely affecting the rights of the parties, learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand supports the impugned order. He submits that the order of the High Court is a well-reasoned and balanced order and therefore should not be disturbed. 10. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received the due consideration of the Court. 11. Zahoor Ahmed, the predecessor in interest of the appellants, had approached the Consolidation Officer under Section 9(2) of the 1953 Act raising a dispute regarding Khata Nos. 99 and 100.

--- JUDGMENT 46 ---
11.1. According to Zahoor Ahmed, the land in question were acquired by Mohammad and Abdul Ghafoor, father of Allah Bux,6 jointly for the benefit of the entire family. Thus, they were in joint occupation of the land. At the time of death of Allah Bux, Ghafoor was the ‘karta’ of the family and all the sons of Allah Bux remained in joint occupation. Zahoor Ahmed claimed that he was in joint occupation of the land in question, paying land revenue to the extent of his share. Thus, he claimed half share in the land in question by way of pedigree. 11.2. According to the respondents, their father had acquired the lands covered by Khata No. 98 through lease; their father had five shares in the said land and one share belonged to Mohammad who died in 1942. Though he was survived by his daughter, as per family custom, she did not have any share in the lands in question. Respondents claimed one share in this land as well. Thus, according to the respondents, they had 11/12 share in Khata No. 98 and 1/12 share belonged to Zahoor. 11.3.

--- JUDGMENT 47 ---
In so far Khata No. 99 is concerned, according to the respondents, these lands were acquired by their father and devolved upon them on the death of their father. They challenged the claim of Zahoor to such land on the ground that Zahoor had made a dastbardari in their favour in the year 1948. Plot Nos. 45, 57, 111 and 112 were claimed by the respondents as having been7 acquired by their father Ghafoor. They, however, admitted half share claim of Zahoor Ahmed in respect of Khata No. 99 while denying the claim to the remaining extent of half. Plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 was wholly claimed by the respondents denying the claim of Zahoor to the extent of half share in the said land. 11.4. Consolidation Officer upon consideration of the pleadings of the parties in dispute had framed the following issues: (i) Whether respondents were entitled to 11/12 share of Khata No. 98? (ii) Whether Zahoor Ahmed was entitled to half share of Khata No. 98? (iii) What was the share of the parties in respect of Khata No. 98? (iv) Whether Zahoor Ahmed was co-tenant of Khata No. 99 as claimed? (v) Whether the respondents were recorded as the sole owner of the land covered by Khata No. 99? (vi) Whether Sami Ullah and Badlu i.e. the respondents were entitled to 11/12 share in respect of plot Nos. 31, 94, 95, 96, 97 and 99 etc. as claimed? (vii) Whether plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 were the sole sirdari of the respondents as claimed?8 (viii) What were the share of the parties qua Khata No. 99? (ix) Whether Zahoor was co-tenant of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 as claimed? (x) Whether the respondents were the sole owner of the land of Khata No. 100? (xi) What were the shares of the parties qua Khata No. 100? 11.5. After noting that it was an admitted position that neither the daughter in the family nor their sons got any share in the lands belonging to the family, Consolidation Officer observed that the appellants and the respondents were recorded as co- tenant of the land in Khata No. 98.

--- JUDGMENT 48 ---
Respondents also admitted the share of the appellants in plot Nos. 94, 95, 96, 99, 100 etc. to the extent of 1/12. Thus, according to the Consolidation Officer, in view of the admission made by the respondents, Zahoor Ahmed was the co-tenant and that the dispute was only regarding his share. Further, the Consolidation Officer remarked that the onus was on the respondent to prove that they were entitled to 11/12 share of the land. Consolidation Officer also noticed that there was a lease deed of 1922 but what was to be seen was whether the lands were acquired jointly.9 11.6. After discussing the evidence and the materials on record, the Consolidation Officer vide the order dated 06.12.1972 held that Zahoor Ahmed was in occupation of the plots of land bearing Nos. 95, 96, 97, 99, 100 and 107 and as many as five plots being 99, 100, 107 etc. were being cultivated by Zahoor. The Khasra for the relevant years indicated that Zahoor was all along in occupation of the above lands; his name was recorded over an area of 3 bighas 10 biswas of lands and he also paid land revenue in respect of which large number of revenue receipts were on record. Thus, the Consolidation Officer concluded that the lands were acquired jointly when Zahoor Ahmed was a minor and his share would be half of the land. Therefore, he was entitled to half share in Khata Nos. 98 and 99. In so far plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 is concerned, it was held that the same remained the exclusive property of the respondents. The Consolidation Officer declared that Zahoor Ahmed being the co-tenant of Khata No. 99 was entitled to half share thereof. Accordingly, it was ordered that the name of Zahoor Ahmed be entered as a co-tenant in Khata No. 99 and partition be made in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 in the following manner: (i) Zahoor - 1/2 (ii) Sami Ullah - 1/410 (iii) Badlu - 1/4 12. Against the aforesaid order dated 06.12.1972, altogether three appeals were filed before the appellate authority i.e. Assistant Settlement Officer- one by Zahoor Ahmed and the other two by the respondents. The appeals were filed under Section 11(1) of the 1953 Act. 12.1. By the common judgment and order dated 25.4.1973, the appellate authority i.e. Assistant Settlement Officer, Sultanpur dismissed all the three appeals. While dismissing the appeals, the appellate authority noted that in the basic year, Khata No.98 was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu and also in the name of Zahoor Ahmed. Khata Nos.99 and 100 were recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu. Zahoor Ahmed filed objection under Section 9 of the 1953 Act contending that in Khata No.99 his name should be recorded. He claimed 1/2 share in Khata Nos.98 and 99 contending that Satai was the common ancestor of both the parties and that he had acquired the disputed land from the joint family. According to him, Allah Bux and Mohammad were the sons of Satai. Abdul Ghafoor was the elder son of Allah Bux and became the ‘karta’ of the joint family. After the death of Allah Bux, Abdul Ghafoor, Abdul Shakoor and Mohd. Ismail, being sons11 of Allah Bux, came into possession of the disputed land jointly. Mohd. Ismail died issueless. The disputed land was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu being the sons of Abdul Ghafoor as ‘karta’ of joint family. 12.2. Zahoor stated that at the time of death of his father, he was a minor and lived with Abdul Ghafoor. Abdul Ghafoor and Abdul Shakoor had 1/2 share in the disputed land. Accordingly, both the parties were in possession of the disputed land. 12.3. Sami Ullah and Badlu objected to the claim of Zahoor and contended that the land in Khata No.99 was acquired by Abdul Ghafoor. Sami Ullah and Badlu admitted 1/12 share in the disputed land and denied share of Zahoor in plot No.115 of Khata No.100. 12.4.

--- JUDGMENT 49 ---
The primary authority i.e. the Consolidation Officer on the basis of the materials of record and the evidence adduced decided the share of Zahoor in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 at 1/2 and dismissed the objection of Zahoor qua plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100. Therefore, Zahoor filed Appeal No. 43 in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No.100. Sami Ullah and Badlu filed Appeal Nos. 50 and 51 against the decision of the Consolidation Officer declaring12 1/2 share in the disputed land of Khata Nos. 98 and 99 as belonging to Zahoor. 12.5. The appellate authority was of the view that plot No.35 was recorded only in the name of Allah Bux. Zahoor had relinquished in favour of Sami Ullah on 30.06.1948. Zahoor also relinquished the share of Ismail. Sami Ullah had filed the patta for the first time before the Consolidation Officer on 07.05.1992. In the settlement exercise, some disputed land was acquired by Allah Bux and Mohammed jointly. Plot Nos.111 and 112 were recorded in the name of Abdul Ghafoor. The appellate authority noted the submission made on behalf of Zahoor that he was in possession of the disputed land in Khata Nos.98 and 99 and paying land revenue and took the view that the disputed land was in possession of the joint family. When Shakoor, father of Zahoor, had died Zahoor was a minor. Thereafter, father of Sami Ullah brought up Ghafoor and Ghafoor lived as a member of the joint family. Though the name of Ghafoor was not recorded, Sami Ullah admitted 11/12 share of Zahoor. According to the appellate authority, Zahoor was in continuous possession over the disputed land. The revenue receipts indicated that he was in possession of 1/2 share thereof and paying the revenue in respect of the said land. As regards plot13 No.

--- JUDGMENT 50 ---
The revisional authority i.e. the Deputy Director of Consolidation noted that according to Zahoor, the disputed land was joint family property and as such, his share in it was 1/2. Khata No. 98 was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu on the one hand and Zahoor on the other hand whereas Khata No. 99 was recorded only in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu. Consolidation Officer had allowed the name of Zahoor Ahmed to be in half of Khata No. 98 and Khata No. 99; however, dismissed the claim of Zahoor Ahmed in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100. Against the aforesaid decision, appeal was filed but the same was dismissed. It was thereafter that the revision came to be filed by Zahoor Ahmed.14 13.2. On the other hand, Sami Ullah claimed that Zahoor had 1/12 share in Khata No. 98 as well as in Khata No. 99 and none in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100. His objection was allowed in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 but was dismissed in respect of the other two Khatas. Therefore, he also filed appeals before the Assistant Settlement Officer which were however dismissed. Thereafter, the related revision petition came to be filed claiming 5/6th share in Khata No. 98 and exclusively claimed Khata No. 99 for himself and Badlu.

--- JUDGMENT 51 ---
It was noted that Khata No. 99 was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu. The revisional authority noted on the basis of the evidence adduced that Shakoor had expired in the year15 1930. Thereafter, the name of Zahoor was recorded as a member of the joint family in Khata No. 98. From the materials on record, the revisional authority noticed that Zahoor was in possession and paying rent in respect of the disputed land. However, the revisional authority accepted the contention of Sami Ullah that Zahoor had relinquished his share in respect of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 by way of relinquishment deed of the year 1948. Deputy Director i.e. the revisional authority noted that relinquishment was by way of a relinquishment deed and that Zahoor had admitted his signature on it. Therefore, there was no reason to disbelieve the contention of Sami Ullah because in the year 1948, Zahoor had relinquished his share in plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112. Further, possession of Zahoor Ahmed was also not recorded. Thus Zahoor Ahmed was held to be not entitled to any share in so far the said plots were concerned. The lower authorities had ignored the relinquishment deed which vitiated their respective orders. On the basis of the relinquishment deed, the Deputy Director allowed the revision of Sami Ullah in respect of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112. As regards claim of Zahoor in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100, the Deputy Director was not convinced about the said claim. That being the position, the revisional authority upheld the view16 taken by the lower authorities and dismissed the revision of Zahoor Ahmed. 14. Assailing the above order of the revisional authority, appellants preferred Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 whereas respondents preferred Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975 before the High Court. High Court heard both the writ petitions together as the two writ petitions arose out of the same consolidation proceedings in respect of Khata Nos. 98, 99 and 100 in village Bhati Jarouli, Sultanpur. 14.1. High Court traced the pedigree of the parties. Satai was the common ancestor and he had two sons, namely, Allah Bux and Mohammad. Mohammad died issueless in the year 1942. Allah Bux had three sons i.e. Abdul Ghafoor who died in 1946, Abdul Shakoor who died in 1930 and Mohammad Ismail who died issueless in 1935. High Court pointed out that the dispute was between the two branches of Abdul Ghafoor and Abdul Shakoor. Petitioners of Civil Misc.

--- JUDGMENT 52 ---
14.3. According to Zahoor Ahmed (father of the appellants), the disputed Khatas were acquired jointly by the common ancestor. After the death of Satai and Allah Bux, the name of Abdul Ghafoor was recorded since he had attained majority by that time and Abdul Shakoor was still a minor. Abdul Ghafoor was ‘karta’ of the family and he looked after Abdul Shakoor and Mohammad Ismail. After the death of Abdul Ghafoor, in view of the settlement arrived at between the legal heirs of Abdul Ghafoor and Zahoor18 Ahmed, the parties were in cultivatory possession of their respective shares in the disputed Khatas. 14.4. On the other hand, Sami Ullah and Badlu (respondents) had contended that Khata No. 98 was taken on patta by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad. In the said patta, share of Abdul Ghafoor was mentioned as 5/6 and that of Mohammad 1/6. After the death of Mohammad, his share devolved in equal proportion upon Abdul Ghafoor and Abdul Shakoor. Therefore, the appellants who represents the branch of Abdul Shakoor got only 1/12 share. 14.5. The case of the contesting objectors (the respondents) with regard to plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 comprising Khata No. 99 was that these plots were their exclusive property in view of the registered relinquishment deed dated 30.06.1948 (which was registered on 07.07.1948 and executed by the father of the appellant Zahoor Ahmed) in favour of the respondents. They contended that the said Khata was neither recorded in the name of Zahoor Ahmed nor was he in possession thereof. Respondents were the exclusive owners of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 of Khata No. 99.

--- JUDGMENT 53 ---
35, 57, 111 and 112 of Khata No. 99 was not denied by Zahoor Ahmed. It was a registered document and thus carried the presumption of genuineness. High Court further noted that the appellants had not questioned the genuineness and correctness of the relinquishment deed at any stage of the litigation. Zahoor Ahmed was very much alive when the consolidation operation had commenced in the village. Though he filed objections and had the full opportunity to dispute the relinquishment deed, he did not do so. There was no evidence on record to show that execution of the relinquishment deed was ever disputed by Zahoor Ahmed. On the contrary, the stand of Zahoor Ahmed all along was that after the death of his20 father, he was brought up by his uncle Abdul Ghafoor; after attaining the age of majority, he might have executed the said relinquishment deed. In the writ proceedings, appellants had contended that they did not admit the genuineness and the binding nature of the relinquishment deed. But such contentions were rejected by the High Court on the ground that Zahoor Ahmed during his entire lifetime at no point of time had disputed the said relinquishment deed. Even otherwise also, the High Court found that said plots were exclusively recorded in the names of the respondents which would go to show that Abdul Shakoor had surrendered his right and title in favour of Abdul Ghafoor. In view of the above, High Court opined that the finding recorded by the Deputy Director of Consolidation in revision was justified and called for no interference. 14.8.

--- JUDGMENT 54 ---
As regards plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100, High Court noted that all the three authorities below had rejected the claim of the appellants holding that the said land belongs to the respondents exclusively. Learned counsel for the appellants also did not press the writ petition with regard to the said plot. That being the position, High Court found no merit in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 and the same was accordingly dismissed.21 14.9. In so far Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975 filed by the respondents is concerned, the challenge was to the finding of co-tenancy recorded by all the authorities below with respect to Khata Nos. 98 and 99 holding that Abdul Ghafoor had half share therein. Respondents (petitioners in Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975) placed reliance on a lease deed dated 07.05.1922 executed by Fateh Bahadur and Jagat Narayan Singh in favour of Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad mentioning their respective shares : Abdul Ghafoor had 5/6 share and Mohammad had 1/6 share. On the death of Mohammad, his share devolved on Zahoor Ahmed to the extent of 1/12 share and the remaining 11/12 share devolved on the respondents. The said patta (lease) was rejected by the Consolidation Officer on the ground that at the relevant time, Zahoor Ahmed was a minor and that the lease had not seen the light of the day nor was it proved. In appeal, the appellate authority held that though the patta (lease) was executed by two persons, it was signed by only one person i.e. Fateh Bahadur. High Court considered the lease deed dated 07.05.1922 and noted that land was taken by two persons, viz, Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux and Mohammad, son of Satai. Abdul Shakoor, father of Zahoor Ahmed was very much alive in the year 1922. He had died some time in the year 1930. It was clear that the lease was taken jointly22 by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad and not as a joint family property by the two persons. That apart, the concept of joint family property prevalent amongst the Hindus was unknown to the Muslims. Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad were the only lessees of the said land. High Court held that the lower authorities had misdirected themselves by considering acquisition of the said property by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad as joint acquisition on behalf of the entire family. The source of acquisition of the said property was the lease deed dated 07.05.1922 and in the revenue records, names of the respondents and of Zahoor Ahmed were recorded. The only dispute was with regard to the extent of their respective shares. The authorities below had proceeded to allot 1/2 share to Zahoor Ahmed on the premise that it was a joint family property. According to the High Court, the said approach was not legally tenable. The revisional authority was also not justified in importing principles of Hindu law while determining the shares of the parties who were admittedly Mohammedans. Accordingly, it was held that appellants would get 1/12 share in the land comprised in the lease deed and not half (1/2) as was decided by the authorities below.23 14.10. In that view of the matter, High Court held that the appellants would have 1/12 share in the plots comprised in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 37, 111 and 112 which exclusively belonged to the respondents. 14.11. That being the position, Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975 was allowed. 15. Thus, against the dismissal of Civil Misc Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 and partly allowing of Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975, the related special leave petitions were filed. 16.

--- JUDGMENT 55 ---
This being the factual scenario, let us now have a brief survey of the 1953 Act. The Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 (already referred to as ‘the 1953 Act’) is an Act to provide for the consolidation of agricultural holdings in Uttar Pradesh for the development of agriculture. The statement of objects and reasons of the 1953 Act is as under: After the enforcement of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, there was naturally a pressing demand for the consolidation of holdings in the State. Since the complicated and numerous types of tenures, both proprietary and cultivatory, the greatest stumbling blocks in the way of successful consolidation of holdings, have been abolished it is an opportune time to start this work. The advantages of24 having in compact blocks all the land farmed by one family need only be briefly mentioned. Boundary lines should be reduced in “number and extent, saving land and diminishing boundary disputes, larger fields would be possible and time saved in making trips to the fields. Further, if land were all one piece barriers, such as fences, hedges or ditches could be erected to obtain privacy and prevent trespassing, thieving and gleening. The control of irrigation and drainage water would be easier; control of pests, insects and disease would also be less difficult. 16.1.

--- JUDGMENT 56 ---
Thus, as per the statement of objects and reasons, after the enforcement of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, there arose the need for consolidation of holdings in the State. It was felt that the advantages of having compact blocks of all the lands farmed by one family was too well known. Boundary lines would be reduced in number thereby not only saving the lands but also reducing boundary disputes. This would also lead to larger fields with attendant advantages. It could be barricaded properly to prevent trespassing and ensure proper irrigation and pest control.25 17. Raison d’etre of the Act was examined by this Court in Attar Singh Vs. State of U.P.1. This Court observed that the object of the 1953 Act is to allot a compact area in lieu of scattered plots to tenure-holders so that large scale cultivation would be possible with all its attendant advantages thus leading to reduction of boundary lines. In the process lot of land would be saved resulting in lesser number of boundary disputes. While reducing the movement of the farmers from one plot to another, consolidation would enure to the benefit of the farmers in erecting fences etc. around a compact area to prevent trespassing and thieving. It would also become easier to control irrigation and drainage besides reducing the number of disputes over water. That apart, pest control etc. would become easier as the farmers would have compact areas for cultivation. This Court observed that such advantages resulting from consolidation of holdings are intended to encourage the development of agriculture leading to more production of foodgrains, so essential for the community. 18. Making a comparison of the 1953 Act with the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (U.P. Act No. 1 of 1951), a Single Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Mool 1 AIR 1959 SC 56426 Chandra Vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation2, observed that U.P.

--- JUDGMENT 57 ---
Section 3 of the 1953 Act contains the definitions of various words and expressions used in the said Act. As per Section 3(1A), chak means the parcel of land allotted to a tenure-holder on consolidation. Consolidation has been defined in Section 3(2) to 2 2007 SCC OnLine All 219627 mean re-arrangement of holdings in a unit amongst several tenure-holders in such a way as to make their respective holdings more compact. Section 3(2A) defines consolidation area to mean the area in respect of which notification under Section 4 has been issued. Section 3(4C) defines holding to mean a parcel or parcels of land held under one tenure by a tenure-holder singly or jointly with other tenure-holders. Land has been defined in Section 3(5) to mean land held or occupied for purposes connected with agriculture, horticulture and animal husbandry, including pisciculture and poultry farming. Rectangulation as defined in Section 3(8A) means the process of dividing the area of a unit into rectangles and parts of rectangles of convenient size with a view to regulating the allotment of chaks during consolidation. Tenure- holder has been defined in Section 3(11) to mean a bhumidhar either with transferrable rights or with non-transferrable rights. Unit has been defined in Section 3(11A) to mean a village or part thereof or two or more villages or parts thereof for which a single scheme of consolidation is to be framed. 19.1. Section 4 deals with declaration and notification regarding consolidation. As per sub-Section 1(a), the State Government, where it is of opinion that a district or part thereof28 may be brought under consolidation operations, may make a declaration to that effect to be published in the official gazette whereupon it shall be lawful for any empowered officer or authority to enter upon the declared land and carry out survey etc. Thus, consolidation proceedings start in a district or part thereof with the issuance of notification under Section 4 which besides being published in the official gazette is also to be published as a public notice at convenient places of the district or part thereof. 19.2. The consequences which would ensue following publication of notification under Section 4 are enumerated in Section 5(2). Amongst the various consequences, it is important to note that once a declaration is notified, every proceeding for correction of records and every suit or proceedings in respect of declaration of rights or interest in any land lying in the area or for declaration or adjudication of any other right at any stage of the proceedings would stand abated. Ofcourse, such abatement would have to be preceded by notice and hearing. That apart, such abatement would be without prejudice to the rights of the persons affected to agitate the rights or interest in dispute in the said suits or proceedings before the appropriate consolidation authorities under and in accordance with the 1953 Act.29 19.3. While Section 7 deals with revision of village map, Section 8 speaks about revision of the field book etc upon such revision of village map. Section 8A provides for preparation of statement of principles to be followed in carrying out the consolidation operations. Section 9 on the other hand provides for issue of extracts from records and statements and publications of records mentioned in Sections 8 and 8A and the issue of notices for inviting objections under sub-section (1) thereof. Sub-section (2) empowers the noticee to file objections within the prescribed period disputing the correctness or nature of the entries in the records or in the extracts furnished therefrom or in the statement of principles or the need for partition. Section 9A deals with disposal of cases relating to claims to land and partition of joint holdings. Section 9B provides for disposal of objections on the basis of the statement of principles. 19.4. Any party to a proceeding under Section 9 and who is aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the Consolidation Officer, as the case may be, may prefer an appeal before the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, within the period prescribed under Section 11. The appellate authority after providing due opportunity of hearing to the parties shall pass30 appropriate order in appeal which shall be final. Sub-Section (2) of Section 11 makes a declaration that the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, hearing an appeal under sub-Section (1) shall be deemed to be a court of competent jurisdiction. 19.5. While the appellate order is final, the Director of Consolidation has been conferred the power of revision and reference under Section 48. He can exercise the powers under Section 48 either on a reference or suo moto. The said power is to be exercised by the Director of Consolidation to satisfy himself as to the regularity of the proceedings or as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any order (other than an interlocutory order) passed by the subordinate authorities. 20.

--- JUDGMENT 58 ---
This is broadly the scheme of the Act. 21. Before we analyse the impugned judgment and order of the High Court, it will be useful to have the pedigree of the parties in the form of a chart which is as under: Satai Allah Bux Mohammad Abdul Ghafoor Shakoor Mohd. Ismail31 Zahoor Sami Ullah Badlu 22. As can be seen from the chart above, the dispute is between the legal heirs of Shakoor i.e. the appellants and the legal heirs of Ghafoor i.e. the respondents. High Court has duly considered the claim of the appellants as well as of the respondents and has taken the view that in so far claim of the appellants to plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 of Khata No. 99 and plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 are concerned, Zahoor Ahmed himself had relinquished those lands in favour of the respondents. Relinquishment deed is a registered one and was never questioned by Zahoor Ahmed during his lifetime. In that view of the matter, the High Court concurred with the finding recorded by the revisional authority and rightly dismissed Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 6635 of 1974 filed by the appellants. 23. In so far Writ Petition No. 18 of 1975 is concerned, the same was filed by the respondents, being aggrieved by the declaration made by the consolidation authorities that appellant would get half (1/2) share in the plots comprised in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 which exclusively belonged to the respondents. High Court took the view that32 consolidation authorities had erroneously proceeded to allot half (1/2) share to Zahoor Ahmed on the premise that the land was a joint family property. High Court held that the authorities were not justified in importing principles of Hindu law while determining the share of the parties who were admittedly Mohammedans. Thus, the High Court held as follows: I have given careful consideration to the three orders of the authorities. I also perused copy of the lease deed dated 07.05.1922. A bare perusal of the said lease deed dated 07.05.1922 clearly shows that the said lease deed was taken by two persons, namely, Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son of Satai. Abdul Shakoor, father of Zahoor Ahmed (Objector) was very much alive in the year 1922. He, according to the finding of the Deputy Director of Consolidation, died some time in the year 1930. It shows that the lease was taken jointly by Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son of Satai. The said lease was not taken as joint family property by these persons. The concept of joint family property which is prevalent amongst the Hindus is not known amongst the Muslims. Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son of Satai, were the only lessees and no other person. The authorities below misdirected themselves by considering the said acquisition of the property by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad as joint acquisition for the family.33 So far as the validity of the lease in question is concerned, the same cannot be disputed by the contesting respondents Nos. 4 to 7 (petitioners of writ petition No. 6635 of 1974). It is not their case that the property was acquired by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad in any other manner. It is also not their case nor established by them that the said property was acquired by Satai, the common ancestor, or by Abdul Ghafoor, father of Zahoor Ahmad, in any other manner. Source of acquisition of the said property is the lease deed in question dated 07.05.1922. In the revenue records in the basic year, names of Sami Ullah and Badlu (respondents Nos. 4 and 5) of the connected writ petition and of Zahoor Ahmad are recorded. Only dispute is with regard to the extent of their respective shares therein. The authorities below have proceeded to allot 1/2 share to Zahoor Ahemed on the basis that it was a joint property of the family. The said approach, in my considered opinion, is not legally tenable. The lease in question was acted upon and was accepted as is evident from the extract of khatauni (record of rights) of the third settlement, Annexure-2 to writ petition No. 18 of 1975. The Deputy Director of Consolidation was not justified in importing principles of Hindu law while determining the shares of the parties. In a nut shell, the petitioners of writ petition No. 6635 of 1974 will get 1/12 share in the land comprised in the said lease deed and not 1/2 as was wrongly held by consolidation authorities.34 In view of the above discussions, it is held that the petitioners of writ petition No. 6635 of 1974 have 1/12 share jointly in the plots comprised in khata Nos. 98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 37, 111 and 112 which exclusively belongs to Sami Ullah and his brother Badlu, sons of Abdul Ghafoor. 24.

--- JUDGMENT 59 ---
1. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 15.12.2020, passed by the High Court of Judicature of Bombay at Bombay in Criminal Appeal No.1014 of 2014, which was heard along with Criminal Appeal No.14/2015, both arising from a common judgment in two Sessions Cases emerged from a single First Information Report. The appellant was the second appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1014 of 2014 Page 1 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023which was partly allowed under the impugned judgment whereunder, his conviction under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’) was confirmed and the sentence imposed therefor was commuted to the period of imprisonment already undergone. 2. The second respondent, who is the father of the deceased Renuka, lodged FIR No.87/11 before Wadala T.T. Police Station on 17.04.2011 on her unnatural death occurred on 16.04.2011. Two Sessions Cases viz., 621/2011 and 853/2011 emerged therefrom. The first and sixth accused in the crime faced trial in the former Sessions Case and the appellant herein along with others faced trial in the latter Sessions Case, for the offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 304-B, 306 and 406 read with Section 34, IPC. After the joint trial, all the accused were convicted for the offence punishable under Section 498-A read with Section 34, IPC, and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years each and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- each and in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment of 2 months. Since in this appeal we are only concerned with the appellant, the 3rd accused, we are not going to refer to the details of conviction of others except to the extent Page 2 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023necessary, at the appropriate place. The appellant herein was the third accused in the said crime after subjected to trial in SC No.853/2011 and in respect of all the other offences he was acquitted. It is against the conviction and the modified sentence handed down for the aforesaid offence that he along with the co-convicts in the said Sessions Case filed Criminal Appeal No.1014 of 2014. 3. The case of the prosecution is as under: - The daughter of the second respondent, Renuka- the victim, was married to the first accused Rajesh Jagan Karote on 11.12.2008 as per Hindu customs and rituals. The said Rajesh Jagan Karote and his relatives demanding dowry for purchasing a residential flat and used to torture her physically and mentally. On 16.04.2011 at about 9.00 pm the appellant herein, who is the husband of Savita, one of the sisters-in-law of the deceased, informed the second respondent that Renuka was admitted in Sion Hospital at Mumbai and by the time the second respondent along with his wife, children and other relatives reached the hospital Renuka breathed her last. On her body he noticed abrasion on forehead and ligature marks on the neck. Suspecting the death of Page 3 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023his daughter as unnatural death, he lodged a complaint which resulted in the registration of the aforementioned FIR and ultimately, the consequential trial of the accused. The appellant herein was also implicated as one of the accused and as noted hereinbefore, he stood the trial which culminated in his conviction under Section 498-A, IPC, and consequential imposition of sentence, as mentioned hereinbefore. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 60 ---
Heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties. 5. Manifold contentions were raised by the appellant to assail the judgment of conviction passed by the High Court confirming his conviction under Section 498-A, IPC. Though the sentence imposed therefor by the trial Court was interfered with by the High Court in the appeal and converted it to the sentence already undergone the appellant is aggrieved inasmuch as pursuant to his conviction and consequently imposed sentence he was terminated from the post of Laboratory Attendant, Balbheem College, Beed, as per order dated 23.11.2015. It is the contention of the appellant that the very case of the prosecution is that since January, 2010, the first accused and his relatives demanded dowry and started torturing Renuka physically and mentally to fetch Rs. 5 Page 4 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023lakhs for purchasing house under MHADA Scheme and the fact is that his marriage with the second accused Savita was solemnised only on 26.10.2010 and hardly within five and half months the unfortunate incident occurred. According to the learned counsel for the appellant the said indisputable facts obtained from the materials on record would reveal that the appellant had not even had opportunity to interact with the deceased much less to harass or to show cruelty to her. The learned counsel would further contend that the said circumstances and the conspicuous absence of specific accusation and lack of any specific evidence against the appellant would reveal that the implication of the appellant in the case is because of the unwholesome attitude over implication, which was deprecated by this Court. Furthermore, it is submitted that the implication of accused Nos.5 and 4, who are respectively another sister-in-law and husband of the deceased and their acquittal would fortify the factum over implication. In short, it is the contention that during the alleged period of torture for dowry of Rs. 5 lakhs, which is the main alleged cruelty, the appellant was not even a relative of the first accused and his family, to fall within the expression ‘relative’ used in Section 498-A, IPC. That Page 5 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023apart, it is the contention of the appellant that there is absolute absence of any evidence against the appellant to connect him with the alleged crime and it is only because he being the husband of the second accused who is the sister of the first accused, the husband of the deceased that he was implicated. Yet another contention was taken to the effect that in the absence of any evidence against the appellant he ought to have been acquitted extending, at least the benefit of doubt granted in the case of accused No.4 and 5 who are respectively the husband of Kavita and Kavita, another sister of accused No.1. As per the impugned judgment, Harinarayan Raja Ram Kurane (accused No.4) and Kavita Harinarayan Kurane (accused No.5) were acquitted by the High Court under Section 498-A, IPC. It is also the contention of the appellant that there is absolutely no basis for the finding in paragraph 42 of the impugned judgment, which reads thus:- “In view of the specific material evidence against accused No.2, 3, 6 and 7 in respect of subjecting the deceased to harassment and cruelty on account of demand of dowry till her last breath would make them liable for an offence punishable under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code.” (Underline supplied) Page 6 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 20236. A scanning of the impugned judgment would reveal that even after detailed discussion of the oral testimonies of the prosecution witnesses nothing specific was unearthed against the appellant herein, by both the trial Court and the High Court. 7. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents would submit that the trial Court as also the High Court carefully examined the evidence and arrived at the finding of guilt against the appellant based on proper appreciation of evidence. 8. A bare perusal of Section 498-A would reveal that the following as the essential ingredient to attract the said offence :- (a) The victim was a married lady (may also be a widow); (b) That she has been subjected to cruelty by her husband or relative(s) of her husband; (c) That such cruelty consisted of either (i) harassment with a view to coerce meeting a demand for dowry, or (ii) a wilful contact by the husband or his relative of such a nature as is likely to lead the lady to commit suicide or to cause grave injury to her life, limb or health; Page 7 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023(d) That such injury as aforesaid may be physical or mental. 9.

--- JUDGMENT 61 ---
On an anxious consideration of the materials on record would reveal that the main instance of demand for Rs. 5 lakhs for the purpose of purchasing residential flat was allegedly occurred since January, 2010 onwards. But then, the evidence on record would show that the marriage between the appellant and Savita (accused No.2) who is one of the sisters of the first accused was conducted much later viz., only on 26.10.2010. The unfortunate incident resulting in her death occurred hardly within five and half months since he became a relative of the family of the husband of the deceased. It is a fact that despite the general, vague allegation no specific accusation was raised against the appellant. That apart, despite our microscopic examination, we could not find any specific evidence brought out by the prosecution against the appellant herein through anyone of the witnesses. In other words, the fact discernible from the impugned judgment is that none of the prosecution witnesses had specifically deposed against the appellant herein of his having committed any cruelty which will attract the offence under Section 498-A, IPC, Page 8 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 2023against him. There is also no case that no complaints were filed implicating the appellant earlier to the subject FIR. In short, we find that there is no scintilla of evidence against the appellant herein to hold that he has committed the offence under Section 498-A, IPC, even with the aid of Section 34, IPC. Being the husband of the second accused, Savita, who was found guilty by the courts below for the aforesaid offence cannot be a ground to hold the appellant guilty under the said offence in the absence of any specific material on record. 10. Para 35 and 36 of the judgment of the trial Court would reveal the manner how the appellant was found guilty. They read thus: “35. It is brought into the argument that there are no specific allegations against rest of the accused except husband and mother-in-law, However they were staying and witnessing all the incidents in the house, Though specific act of the other accused is not there in evidence making the victim to work like servant and allowing the accused no.1 to 6 do cruelty is also not different than assisting them. However the gravity of ill-treatment to which Renuka was subjected is due to the acts of Accused No.1 and 6. They repeatedly assaulted and subjected Renuka cruelty Old burn marks dearly point out the previous incident of cruelty. Page 9 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No.

--- JUDGMENT 62 ---
8245 of 202336. Thus, considering the circumstances it is found that prosecution has clearly proved the guilt of all the accused punishable under section 498-A r/w. 34 and 304-B of Indian Penal Code 1860 against accused No.1 and 6. Hence point No.2 and 3 are answered in the affirmative.” We have already referred to and extracted paragraph 4 of the impugned judgment in the appeal. 11. In the contextual situation, it is only appropriate to keep reminded of the observations of this Court in the decision in Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand1. This Court observed that it is a matter of common knowledge that exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a large number of complaints and the tendency of over implication is also reflected in a large number of cases. 12. We are of the view that in view of such circumstances, the courts have to be careful to identify instances of over implication and to avert the suffering of ignominy and inexpiable consequences, by such persons. 13. The upshot of the discussion is that the finding of guilt against the appellant by the courts below for the offence under Section 498-A, IPC, with the aid of Section 1 (2010) 7 SCC 667 Page 10 of 11 SLP (Crl.) No. 8245 of 202334, IPC, is absolutely perverse in view of the absolute absence of any evidence against him to connect him with the said offence in any manner. 14. For the reasons given above the conviction of the appellant under Section 498-A, IPC, and the consequential imposition of sentence therefor cannot be sustained. Hence, the appeal is allowed, consequently, the impugned judgment and order dated 15.12.2020, passed by the High Court of Judicature of Bombay at Bombay in Criminal Appeal No.1014 of 2014, and the judgment of the trial Court dated 09.12.2014 in Sessions Case No.853/2011, qua the appellant are set aside and the appellant is acquitted of the offence under Section 498-A, IPC. ……………………, J.

--- JUDGMENT 63 ---
2024 INSC 815 Non- Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6886-6887 OF 2011 Manish Kumar Rai … Appellant versus Union of India & Ors. … Respondents J U D G M E N T ABHAY S. OKA, J. FACTUAL ASPECTS 1. These appeals take exception to the judgment and order dated 27th October 2010 of the Armed Forces Tribunal, Principal Bench at New Delhi on a writ petition filed by the appellant before the Bombay High Court, which was transferred to the Armed Forces Tribunal (for short, ‘the Tribunal’). 2. The appellant was working in the post of Artificer III in the Indian Navy. The sailors employed in the Indian Navy are divided into two categories: (a) non-technical and (b) technical. Both categories have different branches. One of the technical branches is of Artificers. Artificers are of various types such as Aircraft Artificers, Electrical Artificers etc. The appellant contended that the Artificers are highly skilled technical personnel. The sailors in the Artificer branch are graded Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 1 of 9according to their level of technical competence, experience, and responsibilities. The ranks of sailors in the Artificer branch start from Artificer V, Artificer IV, Artificer III, Artificer II, Artificer I, Chief Artificer, Master Chief Artificer IInd Class and Master Chief Artificer Ist Class. Artificer cadre is categorised as “X group” sailors. On the other hand, non- Artificers from the non-technical branch are categorised in “Y group” and “Z group”. 3.

--- JUDGMENT 64 ---
On 30th August 2008, the Government of India accepted the 6th Central Pay Commission recommendations. Accordingly, a Gazette Notification of 30th August 2008 was issued, which was brought into force with retrospective effect from 1st January 2006. According to the appellant's case, all personnel from the armed forces with a pay scale of S-9 category were placed in pay band-2 with grade pay of Rs.4200 in the revised pay structure of the 6th Pay Commission. However, Artificers in classes I, II and III, whose pay scale was in the S-9 category, were granted grade pay of Rs.3400, though they were placed in pay band-2. As the anomaly of grade pay regarding Artificers in classes I, II and III was not resolved, the appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the Bombay High Court. By order dated 27th January 2009, the Bombay High Court directed the respondents to examine the appellant's grievance regarding the grade pay of Artificers in ranks I, II and III and to pass appropriate orders after hearing the appellant, if necessary. Accordingly, the appellant’s advocate submitted a representation to the first respondent-Union of India. On 20th Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 2 of 9April 2009, the Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence passed a speaking order dated 20th April 2009. By the said order, the representation was rejected. The appellant challenged the said order by filing a writ petition before the Bombay High Court. After the establishment of the Tribunal, the writ petition was transferred to the Tribunal and numbered as a Transfer Appeal. The Tribunal dismissed the Transfer Appeal by the first impugned order dated 27th October 2010. The appellant applied for a review of the said judgment. However, the Review Petition was rejected by the second impugned order dated 2nd February 2011. SUBMISSIONS 4. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant referred to the Gazette Notification dated 30th August 2008 issued by the Union of India. It is provided that the pay bands and grade pay for the same ranks in both groups will be the same. The learned counsel pointed out that the Chief Petty Officer, who was granted grade pay of Rs.4200, belongs to a non-technical branch. He pointed out that the sailors from non-technical branches are given the ranks of Seaman II, Seaman I, Leading Seaman, Petty Officer, Chief Petty Officer, Master Chief Petty Officer II and Master Chief Petty Officer I. He relied upon Navy instructions No. 2/S/96, which provided that Artificers III and Chief Artificers have relative ranks of Chief Petty Officer. He also pointed out that, upon promotion to the rank of Artificer III, the Artificer sailors are appointed as Chief Petty Officers by a warrant issued by the President of India. He, therefore, submitted that though Artificers of III, II and I class are also Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 3 of 9ranked as Chief Petty Officers, the grade pay of Rs.4200 granted to Chief Petty Officers has been denied to Artificers of III, II and I class, which is highly discriminatory. He submitted that in the counter affidavit filed by the first respondent, it was accepted that Artificers of class I, II and III hold a relative rank of Chief Petty Officer. Still, they are denied grade pay of Rs.4200 on par with the grade pay of the Chief Petty Officer. He also relied upon Navy instructions No. 2/S/96, annexed as Annexure R-2 of the counter affidavit. He also relied upon clarification issued by the Chief of the Naval Staff by a letter dated 5th September 1977 clarifying that Artificers of class III and above are Chief Petty Officers. The learned counsel submitted that the fact that only the Chief Artificer and Chief Petty Officer are eligible for promotion to Master Chief Petty Officer cannot be a reason to deny the grade pay of Rs.4200 to Artificers of Class III, who are Chief Petty Officers. 5.

--- JUDGMENT 65 ---
6886-6887 of 2011 Page 4 of 96. Learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondents pointed out that only when Artificers of grade III are promoted to the post of Chief Artificer, they can be considered to be equivalent to Chief Petty Officer (non- technical). As the Artificers of ranks III to I are below the rank of the Chief Artificer, their grade pay has to be lower than that of the Chief Artificer. However, the grade pay given to Artificers of rank I to III is higher than Petty Officers' grade pay but lower than that of the Chief Artificer/Chief Petty Officer (non- technical). In short, the submission of the learned ASG is that the same grade pay cannot be granted to Artificer III and Chief Artificer as the Chief Artificer is a promotional post for Artificers of Class III. She stated that Artificers work under the command of the Chief Artificer. Learned ASG pointed out the grade pay granted to various sailors in the X group and sailors in the Y group (non-technical). CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 7. The appellant placed reliance on a communication issued by the Director of Personnel in Naval Headquarters dated 16th November 2000 (Annexure P-I). In the said communication, which deals with the seniority of Artificers viz-a-viz non- Artificers, it is stated thus: - “The contention that seniority status of Artificers vis-a-vis non-artificers is ambiguous and unresolved is incorrect. The Regulation 247 of Reg Navy Part III and Navy Instruction 2/96 clearly lays down that the relative rank of Artificers 3rd/2nd/1st Class and Chief Artificers is that of a Chief Petty Officer.” Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 5 of 98. This is the primary document on which the appellant is relying upon. The communication dated 16th November 2000 refers to the seniority status of Artificers vis-a-vis non- Artificers. It refers to Regulation 247.

--- JUDGMENT 66 ---
We have, therefore, perused Regulation 247. We may note here that Regulation 247 does not deal with equivalence. Clause (1) of Regulation 247 provides that the crews of Indian Naval Ships shall rank and command after Naval Cadets according to Regulation 247. Clauses (1) to (3) of Regulation 247 are relevant, which read thus: “247. (1) The crews of Indian Naval Ships shall rank and command after Naval Cadets according to this Regulation. (2) Any sailor of any one of following ranks shall rank and command before any sailor of a rank below it in the following list, except that sailors exercising Military Command rank and command before all sailors placed under their command:- Chief Petty Officer Petty Officer Leading Seaman Able Seaman Ordinary Seaman Boy Seaman (3) Sailors belonging to any one of the ranks mentioned in sub-regulation (2) shall rank and command among themselves according to their seniority in that rank provided that: (a) Chief Engine-Room Artificers, Chief Ordnance Artificers, Chief Electrical Artificers, Chief Shipwright Artificers, Chief Aircraft Artificers. Chief Mechanicians, Chief Aircraft Mechanicians and Chief Electrical Mechanicians shall rank and command over all other ratings of these eight Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 6 of 9branches. "Chief" ratings within one of these branches shall rank and command between themselves according to seniority in "Chief" rating. "Chief " ratings of two or more of these branches shall rank and command between themselves by seniority as Chief Petty Officer. Where "Chief" ratings of any of these eight branches are together with Chief Petty Officers of other branches they will rank and command according to seniority as Chief Petty Officer. (b) Engine-Room Artificers, Ordnance Artificers Electrical Artificers, Shipwright Artificers and Aircraft Artificers of a particular class shall rank and command over all Engine- Room Artificers Ordnance Artificers Electrical Artificers Shipwright Artificers and Aircraft Artificers of a lower class. Within one of these branches sailors of the same class shall rank and command according to their seniority in that class (c) For purposes of departmental work only, in the absence of the departmental officer, the seniormost artificer or mechanician sailor of the department concerned may be directed to take Charge of the department and deputise for the departmental officer.” 9. Therefore, it is apparent that the Chief Artificer’s rank has command over Artificers of classes I to III. Even assuming that Artificers of grades III, II, and I are equivalent to Chief Petty Officers, the Chief Artificers have command over them. 10. At this stage, we may refer to Navy Order 100/67 which deals with the seniority of Artificers vis-a-vis non-Artificers. It records that Artificers of Class III and above are Chief Petty Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 7 of 9Officers and will rank and command with Chief Petty Officers of the other branches depending upon their seniority as Chief Petty Officers. Thus, this rank has been given only for the purposes of seniority vis-a-vis non-Artificers. Hence, for the purposes of seniority, Chief Artificers and Artificers of rank III to I may be equivalent to Chief Petty Officer. But, the Chief Artificer has command over Artificers of III, II and I grade. Moreover, the Chief Artificer is the promotional post for Artificers of Class III. 11. The impugned judgment refers to a table incorporated in paragraph 13. We may note here that the Artificers of Grade IV are equivalent to Petty Officers. Only the Chief Artificer is entitled to promotion to the post of Master Chief Artificer. Artificers of grades I, II and III are not entitled to seek promotion to the post of Master Chief Artificer. The Artificers of class III are entitled to be promoted to the posts of Chief Artificers. Therefore, for the purposes of the pay band, the Chief Artificers in ‘X Group’ and Chief Petty Officer in ‘Y Group’ are treated as equivalent. We may note here that the promotional avenue available to Chief Artificer is of Master Chief Artificer-II. The Chief Petty Officer has a promotional avenue to the post of Master Chief (PO) – II. Master Chief Artificer -II and Master Chief (PO) -II have been given the same grade pay of Rs.4600. For the purposes of grade pay, Artificers of grades I, II and III are placed between Artificers of grade IV and Chief Artificer. Though for the purposes of seniority, Artificers in grades III may be Chief Petty officers, they cannot seek promotion directly to the post of Master Chief Artificers. Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011 Page 8 of 9They can seek promotion to the post of Chief Artificer. Therefore, the grade pay of the Artificer III to I category is between the grade pay of Artificer IV and the grade pay of Chief Artificer. The grade pay of Artificer IV is Rs.2800 and the grade pay of Artificers III to I is Rs.3400. The grade pay of Chief Artificer is Rs.4200/-. 12. Therefore, there is neither any illegality nor arbitrariness in giving grade pay to Artificers III to I which is more than the grade pay of Artificer IV but less than the grade pay of Chief Artificers. The Speaking Order dated 20th April 2009 refers to the fact that under Regulation 247, the “Chief” rating is given only to Chief Artificer and not to Artificers of grades III to I. It also notes that Artificers of grades III to I cannot be directly promoted to the post of Master Chief Artificer. 13.

--- JUDGMENT 67 ---
1. On 30.08.1985, Neelam breathed her last in Simaltalla, PS Sikandra, District Munger, Bihar. The factum of her death was discovered in furtherance of the written report lodged by the Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 1 of 26informant and brother-in-law of the deceased, namely, Ramanand Singh (examined as PW18 before the Trial Court1 ) wherein he alleged that Neelam was abducted by seven persons from their house in an incident which occurred at around 10:00 PM on the said day. On the basis of this information, an FIR bearing no. 127 of 1985 was lodged at PS Sikandra and investigation was commenced which led to the filing of a chargesheet against the seven accused persons, namely – Krishna Nandan Singh (Accused No.1), Ram Nandan Singh (Accused No.2), Raj Nandan Singh (Accused No.3), Shyam Nandan Singh (Accused No.4), Bhagwan Singh (Accused No. 5), Vijay Singh (Accused No. 6) and Tanik Singh (Accused No.7). 2. The Trial Court charged all seven accused persons for the commission of offences punishable under Sections 323, 302, 364, 449, 450, 380/34 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 18602. Later, accused nos. 6 and 7 were distinctly charged for the commission of offences punishable under Sections 342, 506 read with Section 34 of IPC. After trial, the Trial Court, vide order dated 05.06.1992, convicted the accused persons listed as accused nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 for the commission of offences under Section 302/34 and 364/34 of IPC. They were acquitted of 1 Prosecution witness or PW 2 Hereinafter referred as “IPC” Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 2 of 26all other charges, and accused nos. 6 and 7 were acquitted of all the charges.

--- JUDGMENT 68 ---
5. As per the prosecution case, on 30.08.1985 at about 10:00 PM, PW18 was sitting outside the house on a rickshaw along with one Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and Soordas, and Neelam was sleeping inside the house. Her husband, Ashok Kumar, had gone to his native place Ghogsha. Suddenly, the seven accused persons, including the appellants before us, came from north direction along with 15 other unknown assailants. Accused Vijay Singh/A-6 caught hold of the informant/PW18 and as soon as he raised alarm and started shouting, two unknown persons pointed out pistols towards him and directed him to maintain silence. Thereafter, the accused persons who had caught the informant, assaulted him with fists and slaps, and confined him near the well situated on the north side of the house. Meanwhile, A-1 entered the house with 5-7 other accused persons by getting the house unlatched through a resident namely Kumud Ranjan Singh and dragged Neelam out of the house. As soon as they dragged her out, four persons caught hold of Neelam by her arms and legs, lifted her and started moving towards Lohanda. As per the informant, the accused persons also picked up two sarees, two blouses, two petticoats and a pair of slippers from Neelam’s room while going out. Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 4 of 266. As the informant raised alarm, other people of the mohalla also gathered around including PW2 Vinay Kumar Singh, PW4 Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh and PW5 Ram Naresh Singh. The said three witnesses witnessed the accused persons taking away Neelam but could not stop them. The informant explained that no one dared to follow the accused persons as they had pointed pistols and had threatened of dire consequences. The informant also explained the motive behind the commission of the crime. It transpires from his statement that Neelam’s late father Jang Bahadur Singh had no son and his house was in possession of his daughter Neelam. She was abducted in order to forcefully obtain the possession of the house belonging to her father. The second limb of motive stems from the pending litigation between A-1 to A-5 (appellants) on one side and deceased Neelam, her maternal grandfather and her two sisters on the other side. The accused persons had obtained letters of administration and probate of the Will left by late Jang Bahadur Singh from the competent court and the said order came to be challenged before the Patna High Court by the deceased, her maternal grandfather and younger sisters. In the said appeal, the Patna High Court had injuncted the accused persons from alienating any part of the property. The High Court also restrained the execution of the probate of the Will by restraining the delivery of possession of the property to the accused persons. Thus, deceased Neelam was residing in her father’s house along with her husband and brother-in-law in Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 5 of 26order to retain the possession of the property.

--- JUDGMENT 69 ---
BEFORE THE TRIAL COURT 7. The Trial Court, while acquitting A-6 and A-7, observed that the motive attributed for the commission of the crime was not attributable to the said two accused persons as no interest of theirs could be disclosed in the pending litigation. Further, it also found that A-6 was not named in the FIR registered upon the information supplied by PW18 and in his oral testimony, no statement of assault by A-6 and A-7 was given by him. It further held that no evidence sur-faced during the trial to indicate the participation of A-6 and A-7 in the acts of abduction and commission of murder. 8. While convicting A-1 to A-5 on the charges under Sections 302/34 and 364/34 of IPC, the Trial Court primarily relied upon the oral testimonies of PW18/informant, PW2, PW4 and PW5. The motive for the commission of the offence was supplied by the pending legal dispute relating to the property belonging to late Jang Bahadur Singh. The Court also replied upon circumstantial evidence borne out from the testimonies of PW7 (maternal uncle of the de-ceased), PW3 (father-in-law of the deceased), PW23 (sister of the deceased) and PW13 (doctor) to arrive at the finding of guilt. Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 6 of 26BEFORE THE HIGH COURT 9. A reading of the impugned judgment passed by the High Court suggests that the High Court carried out a fresh appreciation of evidence. The High Court firstly examined the question whether Neelam was actually residing in the house from which she was abducted. Relying upon the testimonies of PW7 (maternal uncle of deceased), PW18 (broth-er-in-law of deceased and informant) and PW21 (Investigating Officer), the Court concluded that Neelam was indeed re-siding in the said house. In doing so, the Court discarded the fact that the other independent occupants of the house such as Ram Chabila Singh, his son, Kumud Ranjan Singh etc. did not come in support of the said fact. To overcome this deficiency, the Court relied upon the statements of PW21 and PW23 (sister of deceased) that some make-up articles were found in a bag lying in the room, which was suggestive of the fact that a woman was residing in the said room. 10. In further consideration, the High Court excluded the evidence of PW5 for the reason that his presence at the place of incident was doubtful. For, PW5 deposed that he was heading towards his home from Deoghar and on the way from Lakhisarai to Simaltalla, he stopped at Sikandra Chowk along with PW2 and PW4. It was at this point that they heard the hulla and ended up witnessing the commission of offence. The High Court took note of the fact that while going from Deoghar to Simaltalla, Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 7 of 26Lakhisarai and Ghogsha would come first and thus, there was no reason for PW5 to come all the way to Sikandra Chowk if he was going to his home in Ghogsha as he could have directly proceeded from Lakhisarai to Ghogsha. Nevertheless, the High Court duly relied upon the evidence of PW2, PW4 and PW18 as well as on circumstantial evidence comprising of the testimonies of PW23, PW13 (doctor) and absence of suitable explanation in the statements of accused persons under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19734 as regards the fatal injuries suffered by the deceased. Thus, the High Court upheld the finding of guilt of A-1 to A-5. 11. As regards A-6 and A-7, the High Court reversed the finding of acquittal of the Trial Court into that of conviction. Primarily, the High Court observed that the said two accused persons were acquitted on the basis of the exonerating testimony of PW5 and the same cannot be sustained as the testimony of PW5 has been excluded by the High Court in appeal. Further, the Court held that the testimonies of PW2, PW4 and PW18 were consistent regarding the participation of A-6 and A-7 and thus, they were convicted for the commission of the offences under Sections 364 and 302 of IPC read with Section 34 of IPC. The applicability of Section 34 IPC was based on the fact that A-6 and A-7 had confined PW18 near the well in order to eliminate any 4 Hereinafter referred as “CrPC” Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 8 of 26chances of resistance in the acts committed by the other five accused per-sons.

--- JUDGMENT 70 ---
SUBMISSIONS 12. On behalf of A-6 and A-7, it is submitted that there was no motive for the said accused persons to have indulged in the commission of the offence in question. The motive, if any, existed only for the remaining five accused persons who were interested in the outcome of the pending litigation between the parties. It is further contended that the High Court ought not to have entered into the exercise of re-appreciation of the entire evidence without finding any infirmity in the view taken by the Trial Court. To buttress this submission, it is submitted that since the view taken by the Trial Court was a possible view, it could not have been disturbed by the High Court in appeal. In this regard, reliance has been placed upon the decisions of this Court in State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran5, Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka6, Nepal Singh v. State of Haryana7, Kashiram v. State of M.P.8, Labh Singh v. State of Punjab9 and Suratlal v. State of M.P.10 5 (2007) 3 SCC 755 6 (2007) 4 SCC 415 7 (2009) 12 SCC 351 8 (2002) 1 SCC 71 9 (1976) 1 SCC 181 10 (1982) 1 SCC 488 Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 9 of 2613. It is further submitted that no reliance could be placed upon the testimonies of PW2 and PW4 as their presence at the spot was doubtful. Further, if they were 400 yards away when hue and cry was raised, they could not have seen A-6 taking away PW18 towards the well as the said fact took place prior to the hue and cry. It is further submitted that in the FIR, no pistol was assigned to A-6, whereas, the said fact was brought forward at the time of evidence. The appellants have also raised a question regarding the time of incident on the basis of medical evidence. It is stated that the post-mortem report indicated that half- digested food was found in the stomach of the deceased, whereas, the informant PW18 deposed that the incident took place immediately after dinner. If such was the case, the death ought to have occurred around 1-2 AM in the intervening night of 30.08.1985-31.08.1985, but the post-mortem report, based on the post-mortem conducted at around 05:30 PM on 31.08.1985, indicated that death took place about 24 hours ago and thus, the time of death was around 05:00 PM on 30.08.1985 and not 10:00 PM, as alleged. 14. The appellants have also submitted that the prosecution has not proved that the deceased was actually residing in the concerned house at Simaltalla. 15. Per contra, it is submitted on behalf of the State that mere non-examination of some independent witnesses shall not be Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 10 of 26fatal to the case of the prosecution. Reliance has been placed upon the decision of this Court in Rai Saheb & ors. v. State of Haryana11 to contend that at times, independent witnesses may not come forward due to fear. It is further submitted that the High Court has correctly appreciated the evidence in order to arrive at the finding of guilt of the accused persons. It is further submitted that the testimonies of PW2, PW4 and PW18 are consistent and the High Court has correctly placed reliance upon their testimonies. As regards motive as well, it is submitted that the evidence is sufficient to reveal motive for the commission of the crime. 16. We have heard learned counsels for the appellants as well as for the State. We have also carefully examined the record. DISCUSSION 17. In light of the rival contentions raised by the parties, the principal issue that arises before the Court is whether the finding of guilt of the appellants arrived at by the High Court is sustainable in light of the evidence on record. As a corollary of this issue, it also needs to be examined whether the approach of the High Court was in line with the settled law for reversing an acquittal into conviction in a criminal appeal. 11 (1994) Supp.1 SCC 74 Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 11 of 2618. After two rounds of litigation before the Trial Court and the High Court, it is fairly certain the case is to be examined only with respect to the offences under Sections 364 and 302 of IPC read with Section 34 IPC. With respect to the offence under Section 364 IPC, the case of the prosecution is based on direct oral evidence, and with respect to the offence under Section 302 IPC, the case of the prosecution is essentially based on circumstantial evidence as no direct evidence of the commission of murder could be collected. However, it is quite evident that the offence of murder was committed after the commission of the offence of abduction. There is a sequential relationship between the two offences and thus, in order to set up a case for the commission of the offence of murder, it is necessary to prove the commission of the offence of abduction by the accused persons/appellants. For, the chain, in a case based on circumstantial evidence, must be complete and consistent.

--- JUDGMENT 71 ---
19. In order to prove the offence under Section 364 IPC, the prosecution has relied upon the oral testimonies of four eye witnesses – PW-2, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-18. Their testimonies have been assailed on various counts. The appellants have termed the said witnesses as interested and chance witnesses. The former charge originates from the fact that the witnesses were related to the deceased, and the latter charge originates from the fact that the witnesses had no rea-son to be present at the place of offence and they just appeared unexpectedly as a matter of chance. Let us Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 12 of 26examine both the aspects. We may first examine the testimonies of the witnesses independently, without going into their relationship with the deceased. 20. The informant PW18 has deposed that he was standing near a rickshaw outside his house and the deceased was sleeping inside the house. PW18 was standing along with three independent persons namely, Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and Soordas. The seven accused persons came along with 15 other persons. A-6 and A-7, along with unknown persons, first came to PW18 and took him away towards the well and confined him there. Thereafter, the remaining accused persons, along with other unknown assailants, entered the house wherein the deceased was sleeping. Interestingly, as per the version of the informant, the house was bolted from inside and was opened by a tenant namely Ku-mud Ranjan Singh. The problem with the informant’s version begins from this point itself. As per his version, the first eye witnesses of the incident ought to have been Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry, Soordas and Kumud Ranjan Singh. One person, namely Soordas, was stated to be blind and thus, he may be excluded. Nevertheless, the prosecution ought to have examined the three natural witnesses of the incident namely, Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and Kumud Ranjan Singh. There is no explanation for non-examination of the natural eye witnesses. The version becomes more doubtful when it is examined in light of his statement that he could not prevent the accused persons as Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 13 of 26A-6 had threatened him with a pistol. In the FIR, no pistol has been attributed to A-6, whereas in the statement recorded before the Trial Court, this fact was introduced for the first time, which is indicative of improvement. Furthermore, PW18 got it recorded in the FIR that A-6 and others had assaulted him with fists and slaps, but the said fact was not deposed before the Trial Court in his examination in chief. The discrepancy assumes greater seriousness in light of the fact that no pistol has been recovered from any of the accused persons and if the factum of branding of pistol is un-der the cloud of doubt, the entire conduct of PW18 becomes doubtful and unnatural, as he did not try to prevent the accused persons from entering the premises or from abducting the deceased or from taking away the deceased on their shoulders in front of his eyes as he was the brother-in-law of the deceased. 21. The other eye witnesses, PW2, PW4 and PW5, de-posed collectively in favour of the prosecution as they had arrived at the scene of crime together. At around 10:00 PM on the fateful night, the said eye witnesses happened to be present at Sikandra Chowk and they heard some hue and cry at the house of the deceased. The witnesses were coming together in a jeep from Lakhisarai and were going towards their home in Ghogsha village, the village wherein the deceased was married and also the native village of PW18/informant. PW2 was the driver of PW4. The testimo-nies of the said PWs have made it clear that while coming from Lakhisarai to Sikandra Chowk, Ghogsha came first, Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 14 of 26followed by Lohanda and Simaltalla. In such circumstances, their presence at Sikandra Chowk at 10:00 PM must be explained to the satisfaction of the Court. For, if they were going to their village, there was no occasion for them to come to Simaltalla as it did not fall on their way. But no such ex-planation is forthcoming from the material on record.

--- JUDGMENT 72 ---
22. Interestingly, this lacuna was duly noted by the High Court with respect to PW5 as there was no reason for him to be present at Sikandra Chowk at the time of incident and his testimony was excluded. However, the same logic was not extended to the testimony of PW4 as well, as it was equally improbable for him to be present at Sikandra Chowk at 10:00 PM on the date of incident. His visit to Sikandra Chowk was not necessitated for going to his village. Even otherwise, since the three eye witnesses were similarly placed as per their own version, the rejection of testimony of one witness ought to have raised a natural doubt on the testimonies of the other two witnesses unless they had a better explanation. However, no such doubt was entertained by the High Court and the impugned judgment offers no explanation for the same. In light of their own testimonies, none of the three eye witnesses were required to visit Sikandra Chowk or Simaltalla for going to their village. 23. The testimonies of the eye witnesses are also impeachable in light of the other evidence on record. PW21 was the Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 15 of 26investigating officer in the case and he had examined the aforesaid PWs as eye witnesses of the incident. The version put forth by the eye witnesses meets a serious doubt when examined in light of the evidence of DW3 and DW4, the concerned Deputy Superintendent and Superintendent of Police respectively who had supervised the investigation of the present case. Both these officers were examined as defence witnesses on behalf of the appellants. As per the supervision notes prepared by DW3 during the course of investigation, PW2 and PW4 got to know about the incident only when PW18 came running to them after the incident. PW2, at that time, was sitting in a hotel with Umesh Singh to have ‘prasad’. Similarly, the evidence of DW4 indicates that on the date of incident, at around 10:00 PM, PW4 was coming from Lakhisarai in his jeep and he saw six-seven persons fleeing away in a jeep and he identified them as the accused persons. Thus, PW4 entered the scene after the commission of offence and he did not witness the act of abduction. The testimony of PW2 strengthens the doubt as he deposed that when they reached the police station after the incident with PW18, neither him nor PW4 in-formed the IO that they had directly seen the incident. The stark difference between the versions put forth by the PW21 and DW3/DW4 raises serious concerns regarding the fairness of investigation conducted by PW21 and it is a reasonable possibility that the eye witnesses were brought in to create a fool proof case. The evidence of DW3 Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 16 of 26and DW4, both senior officers who had exercised supervision over the investigation conducted by PW21, indicates that the so- called eye witnesses of the incident were actually accessories after the fact and not accessories to the fact. 24. The second limb of the objection against the testimonies of the eye witnesses is that none of the eye witnesses is an independent witness of fact. Ordinarily, there is no rule of law to discard the testimonies of the witnesses merely be-cause they were known to the victim or belonged to her family. For, an offence may be committed in circumstances that only the family members are present at the place of occurrence in natural course. However, the present case does not fall in such category. In the facts of the present case, the natural presence of the eye witnesses at the place of occurrence is under serious doubt, as discussed above, and for unexplained reasons, the naturally present public persons were not examined as witnesses in the matter. The non- examination of natural witnesses such as Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry, Soordas, Kumud Ranjan Singh and many other neighbours who admittedly came out of their houses to witness the offence, coupled with the fact that the projected eye witnesses failed to explain their presence at the place of occurrence, renders the entire version of the prosecution as improbable and unreliable. The eye witnesses, being family members, were apparently approached by PW18 who in-formed them about the incident and later, their versions were fabricated to make the case Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 17 of 26credible. Notably, when the version put forth by the interested witnesses comes under a shadow of doubt, the rule of prudence demands that the independent public witnesses must be examined and corroborating material must be gathered. More so, when public witnesses were readily available and the offence has not taken place in the bounds of closed walls. 25. Pertinently, the conduct of the eye witnesses also ap-pears to be unnatural considering that they were all relatives of the deceased. Firstly, PW18 did not try to prevent the ab-duction. Even if it is believed that he was held against a pistol, the statement regarding the existence of pistol comes as an improvement from his first information given to the police, as already noted above. Nonetheless, it is admitted that PW2, PW4 and PW5 came in a jeep and they saw the accused persons leaving with Neelam after abducting her. It is also admitted that they had identified the accused persons, who were essentially the relatives of the eye witnesses. In such circumstances, as per natural human conduct, the least that they could have done was to follow the accused persons in their jeep. They admittedly had a ready vehicle with them. Despite so, there was no such attempt on their part, so much so that the dead body of Neelam was not even discovered until the following morning as none of the eye witnesses had any clue as to where the accused persons had taken away the deceased after abducting her. Criminal Appeal No.

--- JUDGMENT 73 ---
1031/2015 and others Page 18 of 2626. One crucial foundational fact in the present case is that the deceased was residing in her father’s house at Simaltalla. Although, the Trial Court and High Court have not doubted the said fact, we have our reservations regarding the same. In addition to the statements of PW18 (informant), PW23 (sister of deceased) and PW7 (maternal uncle of deceased), no other witness has deposed to prove the factum of residence. The admitted evidence on record sufficiently indicates that various other tenants were residing in the same house, including Kumud Ranjan Singh, Education Officer Ram Chabila Singh along with his daughter and son. 27. The investigating officer PW21 had inspected the house and no direct material, except some make-up articles, could be gathered so as to indicate that Neelam was actually residing there. Admittedly, another woman namely, Chando Devi (sister of Ram Chabila Singh) was also residing in the same portion of the house. The High Court did take note of this fact but explained it away by observing that since Chando Devi was a widow, the make-up articles could not have belonged to her as there was no need for her to put on make-up being a widow. In our opinion, the observation of the High Court is not only legally untenable but also highly objectionable. A sweeping observation of this nature is not commensurate with the sensitivity and neutrality expected from a court of law, specifically when the same is not made out from any evidence on record. Criminal Appeal No.

--- JUDGMENT 74 ---
1031/2015 and others Page 19 of 2628. Be that as it may, mere presence of certain make-up articles cannot be a conclusive proof of the fact that the deceased was residing in the said house, especially when another woman was admittedly residing there. Furthermore, if Neelam was indeed residing there, her other belongings such as clothes etc. ought to have been found in the house and even if not so, the other residents of the same house could have come forward to depose in support of the said fact. 29. Notably, certain clothes such as two sarees, two blouses and two petticoats were recovered along with the dead body of the deceased. The prosecution version is that the accused persons had taken away the said clothes from the house of the deceased while abducting her. There is absolutely no explanation for the said conduct on the part of the accused persons. It is difficult to understand as to why the accused persons would take her clothes along while abducting her. On the contrary, this fact actually serves the case of the prosecution in proving that the de- ceased was actually residing at the house in Simaltalla. The clothes appear to have been planted along with the dead body in order to support the fact of actual residence of the deceased at her father’s house in Simaltalla. In light of the material on record, it could be concluded that no material whatsoever could be found at the house of Jang Bahadur Singh to directly indicate that the deceased was residing there. The make-up articles were linked with the deceased on the basis of a completely unacceptable Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 20 of 26reasoning and without any corroborative material. The prosecution has failed to examine even one cohabitant to prove the said fact. Furthermore, no personal belongings of the deceased, such as clothes, footwear, utensils etc., could be found in the entire house. Therefore, we are not inclined to believe that the deceased was actually residing in the house at Simaltalla. In the same breath, we may also note that even for PW18, no material was found in the said house to indicate that he was in fact residing there. Apart from his own statement, no witness has come forward to depose that the informant was a resident of the said house. The prosecution has not spotted any room in the entire house wherein PW18 was residing and thus, his own presence at the place of occurrence is doubtful. 30. The appellants have also raised certain objections with respect to the time of death. The discrepancy has been flagged in light of the post mortem report, based on the post-mortem conducted at around 5:30 PM on 31.08.1985, which indicates that death took place around 24 hours ago. It indicates that the time of death must have been around 5:00 PM on 30.08.1985, which is contrary to the evidence of PW18 that the incident took place around 10:00 PM on 30.08.1985. A post mortem report is generally not considered as conclusive evidence of the facts mentioned in the re-port regarding the cause of death, time of death etc. It could always be corroborated with other direct evidence on record such as ocular evidence of the eye witnesses. Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 21 of 26However, when there is no other credible evidence on record to contradict the report, the facts stated in the post mortem report are generally taken as true. In the present matter, the evidence of the eye witnesses has been declared as wholly unreliable including on the aspect of time of death. Thus, there is no rea-son to doubt the post mortem report and the findings there-in. 31. At this stage, we may also note that the approach of the High Court in reversing the acquittal of A-6 and A-7 was not in line with the settled law pertaining to reversal of acquittals. The Trial Court had acquitted the said two accused persons on the basis of a thorough appreciation of evidence and the High Court merely observed that their acquittal was based on the improbable statement of PW5 and since the evidence of PW5 stood excluded from the record, there was no reason left for the acquittal of A-6 and A-7. Pertinently, the High Court did not arrive at any finding of illegality or perversity in the opinion of the Trial Court on that count. Furthermore, it did not arrive at any positive finding of involvement of the said two accused persons within the sphere of common intention with the remaining accused persons. Equally, the exclusion of the evidence of PW5, without explaining as to how the evidence of PW2 and PW4 was not liable to be excluded in the same manner, was in-correct and erroneous. 32. We do not intend to say that the High Court could not have appreciated the evidence on record in its exercise of appellate Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 22 of 26powers. No doubt, the High Court was well within its powers to do so. However, in order to reverse a finding of acquittal, a higher threshold is required. For, the presumption of innocence operating in favour of an accused through-out the trial gets concretized with a finding of acquittal by the Trial Court. Thus, such a finding could not be reversed merely because the possibility of an alternate view was alive. Rather, the view taken by the Trial Court must be held to be completely unsustainable and not a probable view. The High Court, in the impugned judgment, took a cursory view of the matter and reversed the acquittal of A-6 and A-7 without arriving at any finding of illegality or perversity or impossibility of the Trial Court’s view or non-appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court. 33.

--- JUDGMENT 75 ---
State of Karnataka13, Anwar Ali v. State of H.P.14 ) 7.2. With an order of acquittal by the trial court, the normal presumption of innocence in a criminal matter gets reinforced (see Atley v. State of U.P.15 ) 7.3. If two views are possible from the evidence on record, the appellate court must be extremely slow in interfering with the appeal against acquittal (see Sambasivan v. State of Kerala16 )” 34. Having observed that the case of the prosecution is full of glaring doubts as regards the offence of abduction, we may briefly note and reiterate that the offence of murder is entirely dependent on circumstantial evidence. Although, the post mortem report indicates that the death of the deceased was unnatural and the commission of murder can-not be ruled out. But there is no direct evidence on record to prove the commission of murder by the accused per-sons. The link of causation between the accused persons and the alleged offence is conspicuously missing. The circumstantial evidence emanating from the facts sur-rounding the offence of abduction, such as the testimonies of eye witnesses, has failed to meet the test of proof and cannot be termed as proved in the eyes of law. Therefore, the 13 (2019) 5 SCC 436 14 (2020) 10 SCC 166 15 AIR 1955 SC 807 16 (1998) 5 SCC 412 Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 24 of 26foundation of circumstantial evidence having fallen down, no inference could be drawn from it to infer the commission of the offence under Section 302 IPC by the accused persons. It is trite law that in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the chain of evidence must be complete and must give out an inescapable conclusion of guilt. In the pre-sent case, the prosecution case is far from meeting that standard. 35. As regards motive, we may suffice to say that motive has a bearing only when the evidence on record is sufficient to prove the ingredients of the offences under consideration. Without the proof of foundational facts, the case of the prosecution cannot succeed on the presence of motive alone. Moreover, the motive in the present matter could operate both ways. The accused persons and the eyewitnesses belong to the same family and the presence of a property related dispute is evident. In a hypothetical sense, both the sides could benefit from implicating the other. In such circumstances, placing reliance upon motive alone could be a double-edged sword. We say no more.

--- JUDGMENT 76 ---
36. The above analysis indicates that the prosecution has failed to discharge its burden to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The reasonable doubts, indicated above, are irreconcilable and strike at the foundation of the prosecution’s case. Thus, the appellants are liable to be acquitted of all the charges. Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others Page 25 of 2637. In light of the foregoing discussion, we hereby conclude that the findings of conviction arrived at by the Trial Court and the High Court are not sustainable. Moreover, the High Court erred in reversing the acquittal of A-6 and A-7. Accordingly, the impugned judgment as well as the judgment rendered by the Trial Court (to the extent of conviction of A-1 to A-5) are set aside, and all seven accused persons (appellants) are hereby acquitted of all the charges levelled upon them. The appellants are directed to be released forthwith, if lying in custody. 38. The captioned appeals stand disposed of in terms of this judgment. Interim application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. No costs.

--- JUDGMENT 77 ---
5. The aforesaid Writ Petition No. 3820 of 2020 filed by the respondents was allowed by the impugned judgment and order dated 19.09.2022 passed by the High Court holding that the appellant-Bank was not justified in withholding the sale certificate. The respondents were always ready and willing to pay the sale consideration. The appellant-Bank could not have denied the issuance of the sale certificate and the execution of the sale deed. The issuance of the sale certificate was not refused by the appellant-Bank for want of non-deposit of the balance sale consideration within 90 days as stipulated under Rule 9(4) of the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 20021, therefore, such a plea taken by the appellant-Bank for the first time in the writ petition is not tenable. 1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Rules’ 36. The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant-Bank is that in view of the statutory provisions contained under the Rules, especially Rule 9(4) of the Rules, since the respondents had not deposited the balance sale consideration within the mandatory period of 90 days, the High Court has erred in directing the appellant-Bank to issue the sale certificate and to execute the sale deed. The balance sale consideration was never deposited by the respondents within the time permitted and the letter(s) of the respondents clearly establishes that they kept on seeking extension of time without depositing the amount. Moreover, on the complaint of the appellant-Bank to the Central Bureau of Investigation2 made on 08.03.2018, the Enforcement Directorate3 had taken suo moto cognizance and issued an advisory to the appellant-Bank not to release the title deeds. 7. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the only issue which arises for consideration is as to whether there was any default on part of the respondents in depositing the balance 2 In short “CBI” 3 In short “ED” 4amount within the time prescribed pursuant to the auction sale dated 10.04.2018 so as to attract Rule 9(4) of the Rules and allow the appellant-Bank to cancel the auction which had already been confirmed. 8. There is no dispute to the fact that the appellant-Bank had issued e-auction notice on 17.03.2018 and had conducted the auction on 10.04.2018. The respondents had participated in the said auction and were recognized as the highest bidder who deposited 25% of the auction money amounting to Rs. 36,00,000/- then and there. On the very same day, a sale confirmation letter was issued by the authorized officer of the appellant-Bank requiring the respondents to pay the balance amount of Rs. 1,06,50,000/- within 15 days so that the sale certificate may be issued. 9. It may be noted that the respondents at no point of time have denied payment of the balance auction money as demanded to be paid within the 15 days period. It was only the appellant-Bank that denied the issuance of the sale certificate, first on the pretext that the guarantor had filed Writ Petition No. 12390 of 2018 challenging the e-auction 5notice dated 17.03.2018 and had obtained a stay order on 18.04.2018. Secondly, the appellant-Bank on 08.03.2018 had made a complaint to the CBI and that ED took suo moto cognizance whereby an advisory was issued to the appellant- Bank not to release the original property documents and that the same be kept in safe custody of the bank till further directions of the ED. 10. The appellant-Bank issued e-auction Notice on 17.03.2018 after it had already made the complaint to the CBI but this aspect of the matter was not disclosed in the advertisement. Thus, a conscious decision was taken by the appellant-Bank to go ahead with the e-auction despite there being a complaint to the CBI. It is subsequent to the complaint to the CBI that the e-auction notice was issued and the e-auction was conducted on 10.04.2018 which was also confirmed in favour of the respondents. In such a situation it does not lie in the mouth of the appellant-Bank to take shelter on the basis of the complaint made to the CBI and to deny issuance of the sale certificate, particularly when there was no specific direction either of the CBI or the ED not to confirm the 6auction sale or to issue the sale certificate. The only rider was to keep the property documents in safe custody. The respondents, on the other hand, never insisted for the release or the handing over of the property documents rather submitted that they would not create any third-party interest in the property auctioned and that the original documents of the property would be collected by them, subsequently on the consent and clearance from the CBI and ED. In the light of such a stand taken by the respondents on affidavit, the appellant-Bank apparently was not justified in refusing to issue sale certificate to the respondents on the pretext that there was an advisory from the ED. It is worth noticing that even the advisory of ED dated 08.06.2018 is not material for not accepting the balance sale consideration within the period of 15 days stipulated in the sale confirmation letter dated 10.04.2018 which period expired on 25.04.2018, much before the issuance of the above advisory. The respondents were not responsible either for the delay in depositing or non- acceptance of the balance auction amount by the appellant- Bank. 711. As far as the filing of Writ Petition No. 12390 of 2018 by one of the guarantors is concerned, an interim stay order was passed therein on 18.04.2018 by which time the auction had already taken place and confirmed. The said writ petition was ultimately dismissed on 18.07.2018 and as such the interim stay order ceased to exist. The interim stay order granted therein was of no effect insofar as the issuance of sale certificate to the respondents was concerned as the sale had already taken place and stood confirmed before the passing of the interim stay therein. There was no direction or stay on the issuance of sale certificate. The passing of the interim stay order in the above writ petition was not on account of the respondents so as to assign any default on their part in depositing the balance sale consideration within the time stipulated. 12. The communication dated 24.12.2019, by which the appellant-Bank took a decision to cancel the auction sale and to return the amount deposited by the respondents, is completely silent as regards the default, if any, committed by the respondents in depositing the balance auction amount as 8per the mandate of Rule 9(4) of the Rules. The said plea was taken by the appellant-Bank for the first time through the counter affidavit filed in the writ petition. It is well recognized that the validity of an order can only be adjudged on the basis of the reasoning contained in the order and the said reasoning cannot be supplemented in any manner much less by means of a counter affidavit or a supplementary affidavit when the parties have entered into a litigation. In Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr. v. Chief Election Commissioner and Ors.4 it has been clearly laid down that the parties are not permitted to raise new pleas not contained in the order impugned while assailing the correctness or the validity of such an order. In view of the law so laid down, the appellant- Bank was certainly not entitled to raise the plea of default under Rule 9(4) of the Rules through the counter affidavit. 13. Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of sub-Rules (4) and (5) of Rule 9 of the Rules, if read together in conjunction, would reveal that it is only for the default in payment of the 4 (1978) 1 SCC 405 9balance auction amount within the period mentioned that the property could be resold and that the period of 15 days stipulated therein for the deposit of the balance sale amount may be extended, as may be agreed upon in writing. It means that first there has to be a default on part of the auction purchaser to invite cancellation of the auction and second, that the period of deposit stipulated therein is not absolute rather extendable with the agreement of the parties. 14. Sub-Rules (4) and (5) of Rule 9 of the Rules are extracted below: “(4) The balance amount of purchase price payable shall be paid by the purchaser to the authorized officer on or before the fifteenth day of confirmation of sale of the immovable property or such extended period [as may be agreed upon in writing between the purchaser and the secured creditor, in any case not exceeding three months]. (5) In default of payment within the period mentioned in sub-rule (4), the deposit shall be forfeited [to the secured creditor] and the property shall be resold and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may be subsequently sold.” 1015. In Varimadugu Obi Reddy v. Sreenivasulu and Ors.5, this Court while interpreting Rule 9(4) of the Rules observed that it refers to a period of 15 days for deposit of balance sale consideration or such extended period for which no outer limit has been prescribed. Therefore, it appears that the time stipulated therein is not sacrosanct and the period can be extended as agreed upon in writing by the parties. A similar view has also been expressed in an earlier decision of this Court in General Manager, Sri Siddeshwara Cooperative Bank Ltd. and Anr.

--- JUDGMENT 78 ---
v. Ikbal and Ors.6 wherein referring to Rule 9(4) of the Rules, it was held that the time for deposit stipulated therein is not sacrosanct and may be extended if there is a written agreement between the parties. 16. In the case at hand, the correspondence between the parties reveals that the respondents only sought extension of time for the reason that the appellant-Bank itself was not in a position to accept the amount as there was a complaint to the CBI, an advisory of the ED and a stay from the High 5 (2023) 2 SCC 168 6 (2013) 10 SCC 83 11Court. The silence on part of the appellant-Bank in either immediately revoking the sale confirmation or refusing to extend the time, impliedly amounted to extension of time in writing with consent. 17. Secondly, the non-deposit of the balance sale consideration within the time limit prescribed under Rule 9(4) was not attributable to the respondents so as to call them defaulters within the meaning of the provisions of Rule 9 (4) and (5) of the Rules. 18. The correspondence on record clearly reveals that the respondents were always ready and willing to deposit the balance auction amount of Rs.1,06,50,000/- and had rather submitted a bank draft dated 15.10.2022 of the said amount and had requested for the issuance of the sale certificate and possession of the auction property. The said correspondence clearly establishes the bona fide of the respondents and it was only the appellant-Bank who had avoided the issuance of the sale certificate. There is no material on record to justify non-acceptance of the balance sale consideration from the respondents within 15 days of the confirmation of the sale 12and whatever pleas have been taken by the appellant-Bank to avoid acceptance are all subsequent and are not very material. 19. In these facts and circumstances, reason for the non- issuance of the sale certificate is solely attributable to the appellant-Bank and that there were no latches, negligence or default on part of the respondents in offering to deposit the balance auction amount. Since there is no default on their part, non-deposit of the said amount within the stipulated period would not be fatal within the meaning of sub-Rules (4) and (5) of Rule 9 of the Rules. 20. It is pertinent to mention here that the cancellation of the auction sale vide communication dated 24.12.2019 is purely unilateral in nature without any notice or opportunity of hearing to the respondents. The said cancellation as such is per se in violation of the principles of natural justice and is illegal. 21. Learned counsel for the appellant-Bank, relying upon Union Bank of India v. Rajat Infrastructure Private Limited and 13Others7, had submitted that the statutory period prescribed under Rule 9(4) is not liable to be extended by this Court even in exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. In the said case, this Court accepted that though the plenary powers of the Supreme Court under Article 142 of the Constitution are inherent which are of very wide amplitude but the said power cannot be used to supplement the substantive law by ignoring the express statutory provision. The aforesaid authority cited on behalf of the appellant-Bank is not of any help to it in this case as we are not providing for any new period of limitation for depositing the balance sale consideration or extending the time period provided under the Rules. We are simply holding that the period to deposit the balance sale consideration, as provided under the Rules, is not sacrosanct and is extendable with the consent in writing of the parties and that Rule 9(4) will only come into play when there is default on part of the party i.e. the auction purchaser to deposit the amount and will not 7 (2023) 10 SCC 232 14apply where there is no default or that the default, if any, lies upon the auctioneer i.e. appellant-Bank in the case at hand. 22. Accordingly, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court has not committed any error of law in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case in holding that the appellant- Bank manifestly erred in cancelling the auction sale dated 10.04.2018 and in directing to issue sale certificate/register the sale deed in favour of the respondents after getting the balance auction amount deposited within a period of four weeks. 23.

--- JUDGMENT 79 ---
4. The present appeal arises out of an order passed by the High Court of Gujarat on an application made by the appellant for grant of parole under Rule 19 of the Prisons (Bombay Furlough and Parole) Rules, 1959. As the prayer was rejected by the impugned order, this appeal was filed before this Court. While arguing the appeal before this Court, on 26th June 2023, a submission was made on behalf of the appellant that the application for remission made by the appellant under sub­section (2) of Section 432 of the CrPC was not being considered by the State Government. Therefore, a notice was issued on 26th June 2023 on that limited aspect, and a direction was issued to expeditiously decide the pending application for grant of remission. 5. On 15th September 2023, the Home Department of the Government of Gujarat passed an order granting remission to the appellant. His remaining sentence was remitted. While granting remission by the order dated 15th September 2023, four conditions were imposed, which read thus: “Conditions: (1) After the release from jail the prisoner shall behave decently for 2 (Two) years. For this purpose he has to submit two Sureties of the respectable persons of the Society stating that the Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 2 of 17prisoner shall not breach the peace and harmony of the society and also shall not threaten the complainant and witnesses. (2) If the prisoner after the release from the jail carries out any cognizable offence or inflict any serious injury to any citizen or property then he will be arrested again and he will have to serve the remaining period of sentence in jail. (3) After being released from jail the prisoner shall mark his presence in the nearest police station for a period of 1 (one) year. (4) The prisoner shall be released only after paying the unpaid fine amount if any.” (emphasis added) As the appellant was aggrieved by the first two conditions, we permitted him to amend the appeal and challenge conditions nos.1 and 2 instead of driving him to file a fresh writ petition before the High Court. SUBMISSIONS 6. Mr Rauf Rahim, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, has made submissions on the power of the State Government to impose conditions while granting remission. He submits that the impugned conditions defeat the very object of the grant of remission. He submitted that the word “decently” Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 3 of 17used in condition no.1 is vague. The concept of decency differs from person to person. Therefore, putting such a condition of maintaining decent behaviour is completely violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India being manifestly arbitrary. It is submitted that putting such a condition confers arbitrary power on the State Government to cancel the remission order. Hence, the condition violates Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 7. Regarding condition no.2, the learned senior counsel submitted that even if a false allegation is made against the appellant of commission of any cognizable offence, he will be deprived of remission granted under the order dated 15th September 2023. The learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Shaikh Abdul Azees v. State of Karnataka1. While dealing with sub­section (3) of Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (for short, ‘the CrPC of 1898’) which is pari materia with Section 432 of the CrPC, this Court held that on breach of any of the conditions on which remission is granted, there is no automatic revival of the sentence. He submitted that both conditions are completely illegal. 8. Ms Swati Ghildiyal, the learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent­State of Gujarat, submitted that under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC, the appropriate Government has the power to remit the whole or any part of the punishment subject to certain conditions. The provision requires the convict to accept 1 (1977) 2 SCC 485 Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 4 of 17the said conditions, without which he cannot be granted the benefit of remission. The learned counsel submitted that it is very well settled that a convict is not entitled to remission of the sentence as a matter of right. She submitted that the limited right of the convict is only to be considered for remission as held by this Court in the case of Union of India v. V. Sriharan alias Murugan & Ors2. The learned counsel also relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Epuru Sudhakar & Anr. v.

--- JUDGMENT 80 ---
of A.P. & Ors.3, which lays down that the power to remit sentence is a discretionary power which has to be exercised on public interest considerations. The learned counsel submitted that the appellant has accepted the conditions imposed on him and has furnished surety in terms of condition no.1. Hence, no interference is called for. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 9. Section 432 of the CrPC reads thus: “432. Power to suspend or remit sentences.—(1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an offence, the appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or any part of the 2 (2016) 7 SCC 1 3 (2006) 8 SCC 161 Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 5 of 17punishment to which he has been sentenced. (2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of the Court before or by which the conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons for such opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of the record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists. (3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or remission, and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence. (4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section may be one to be fulfilled by the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of his will. Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 6 of 17(5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions as to the suspension of sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with: Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a male person above the age of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, unless the person sentenced is in jail, and— (a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through the officer in charge of the jail; or (b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration that the person sentenced is in jail. (6) The provisions of the above sub­ sections shall also apply to any order passed by a Criminal Court under any section of this Code or of any other law which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him or his property. (7) In this section and in Section 433, the expression “appropriate Government” means,— (a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 7 of 17order referred to in sub­section (6) is passed under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; (b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is passed.” (emphasis added) Under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC, the appropriate Government has the power to remit the whole or any part of the punishment of a convict. The remission can be granted either unconditionally or subject to certain conditions. As expressly provided under sub­section (1) of Section 432, actual remission takes effect only after the convict accepts the conditions. Thus, there is no doubt that there exists a power in the appropriate Government to grant remission subject to compliance with conditions. 10. Insofar as the exercise of power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC is concerned, the Constitution Bench in the case of V. Sriharan2 has approved the view taken by this Court in the case of Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab4. The view taken is that the decision to grant remission has to be well­ informed, reasonable and fair to all concerned. 4 (2013) 3 SCC 294 Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 8 of 1711. It is no doubt true that the power to remit a sentence under Section 432(1) of the CrPC is discretionary. One of the considerations for the exercise of the discretion can be public interest. The gravity and nature of the offences committed by the convict are also factors to be considered. The antecedents of the convict are also relevant. Almost all the States have a written policy on the grant of remission under Section 432(1) of the CrPC. For example, the 1st respondent, the State of Gujarat, has a policy that forms part of the Government Resolution dated 23rd January 2014, which was amended from time to time. The said Government Resolution incorporates guidelines/policy for consideration of cases for grant of remission and premature release of prisoners. The existence of a rational policy is necessary to prevent the arbitrary exercise of power to grant a remission under Section 432(1) of the CrPC. 12. A convict cannot seek remission as a matter of right. However, he has a right to say that his case for the grant of remission ought to be considered in accordance with the law. The power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC has to be exercised in a fair and reasonable manner. Therefore, conditions imposed while exercising the power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 must be reasonable. The conditions must stand the test of scrutiny of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. If the conditions imposed are arbitrary, the conditions will stand vitiated Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 9 of 17due to violation of Article 14. Such arbitrary conditions may also violate the convict's rights under Article 21 of the Constitution. 13. Now, we come to condition no.1. The first part of this condition requires the convict to behave decently for a period of two years after release from jail. The convict must submit two respectable sureties to ensure that he does not commit the breach of peace and harmony of the society and does not threaten the complainant and the witnesses. The words ‘decent’ or ‘decently’ are not defined in the CrPC or any other cognate legislation. The concept of decency of each human being is likely to be different. The idea of decency keeps on changing with time. As the term ‘decency’ is not defined in the CrPC or any other cognate legislation, every person or authority may interpret the same differently. Therefore, such a condition while granting remission becomes too subjective. Putting such a vague condition while exercising the power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC will give a tool in the hands of the executive to cancel the remission at its whims and fancies. Therefore, such a condition is arbitrary and will be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Such a condition cannot be imposed as it will defeat the very object of remitting the sentence in the exercise of powers under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC. Therefore, condition no.1 cannot be sustained. If a condition imposed is unclear or ambiguous, it can have different meanings. Consequently, it becomes very difficult to enforce such conditions. Thus, the Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 10 of 17condition imposed while granting remission must be such that it is capable of being complied with and enforced. 14. Now, we come to condition no.2, which provides that if the appellant, after his release from jail, commits any cognizable offence or inflicts any serious injury to any citizen or property, he will be arrested again and will have to serve the remaining period of the sentence in jail. Thus, this condition authorises the appropriate Government to arrest the convict and revoke the benefit of remission. This clause provides for automatic cancellation of the order remitting the sentence. In this respect, it is necessary to consider the decision of this Court in the case of Shaikh Abdul Azees1. It was a case where remission was earned by the appellant therein after undergoing a life sentence for fifteen and a half years. The High Court held that Section 303 of the IPC was applicable, and this was a case of conditional remission under Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898. Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898 has been quoted in paragraph 13 of the said decision, which reads thus: “13. We are, however, clearly of opinion that for the purpose of Section 303 IPC it does not make any difference whether the remission under Section 401 CrPC is with or without conditions. This is clear from a perusal of sub­section (3) of Section 401 CrPC which reads as follows: “401(3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 11 of 17or remitted, is, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or remission and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has been suspended or remitted, may, if at large, be arrested by any police officer without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence.” An identical provision is found in sub­section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC and sub­section (3) of Section 473 of BNSS. Ultimately, in paragraph 14 of the said decision, while dealing with sub­ section (3) of Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898, this Court held thus: “14. It is manifest from the above provision that on breach of any condition of the remission there is not an automatic revival of the sentence. It will certainly be open to the Government in a particular case to cancel the remission but it may not. The Government is not under a legal obligation to cancel the remission. It is only when the Government chooses to pass an order of cancellation of the remission of sentence that the convict is arrested and is required to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence. During the interregnum the accused Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 12 of 17who is released cannot be said to be under a sentence of imprisonment for life. While he is in enjoyment of the freedom on account of remission, that period is not even reckoned under Section 401 CrPC for the purpose of calculation of the sentence to be served in the eventuality.” (emphasis added) 15. The effect of remitting the sentence is the restoration of the liberty of a convict. If the order granting remission is to be cancelled or revoked, it will naturally affect the convict's liberty. The reason is that when an action is taken under sub­section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS, it results in the convict being taken to prison for undergoing the remaining part of the sentence. Thus, the benefit of remission stands withdrawn. Therefore, this drastic power cannot be exercised without following the principles of natural justice. A show cause notice must be served on the convict before taking action to withdraw/cancel remission. The show cause notice must contain the grounds on which action under sub­ section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS is proposed to be taken. The concerned authority must give the convict an opportunity to file a reply and of being heard. After that, the authority must pass an order stating brief reasons. The principles of natural justice must be read into sub­section (3) of Section 432 and sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS. The convict whose remission has been Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 13 of 17cancelled can always adopt a remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 16. In view of the legal position stated above, condition no.2 cannot be interpreted to mean that every allegation of a breach thereof would automatically result in the cancellation of the order of remission. Registration of a cognizable offence against the convict, per se, is not a ground to cancel the remission order. The allegations of breach of condition cannot be taken at their face value, and whether a case for cancellation of remission is made out will have to be decided in the facts of each case. Every case of breach cannot invite cancellation of the order of remission. The appropriate Government will have to consider the nature of the breach alleged against the convict. A minor or a trifling breach cannot be a ground to cancel remission. There must be some material to substantiate the allegations of breach. Depending upon the seriousness and gravity thereof, action can be taken under sub­section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS of cancellation of the order remitting sentence. 17. Our conclusions can be summarised as under: (i) Under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­ section (1) of Section 473 of the BNSS, the appropriate Government has the power to remit the whole or any part of the punishment of a convict. The remission can be Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 14 of 17granted either unconditionally or subject to certain conditions; (ii) The decision to grant or not to grant remission has to be well­informed, reasonable and fair to all concerned; (iii) A convict cannot seek remission as a matter of right. However, he has a right to claim that his case for the grant of remission ought to be considered in accordance with the law and/or applicable policy adopted by the appropriate Government; (iv) Conditions imposed while exercising the power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 or sub­section (1) of Section 473 of the BNSS must be reasonable. If the conditions imposed are arbitrary, the conditions will stand vitiated due to violation of Article 14. Such arbitrary conditions may violate the convict's rights under Article 21 of the Constitution; (v) The effect of remitting the sentence, in part or full, results in the restoration of liberty of a convict. If the order granting remission is to be cancelled or revoked, it will naturally affect the liberty of the convict. The reason is that when action is taken under sub­section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS, it results in the convict being taken to prison for undergoing the remaining part of the sentence. Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 15 of 17Therefore, this drastic power cannot be exercised without following the principles of natural justice. A show cause notice must be served on the convict before taking action to withdraw/cancel remission. The show cause notice must contain the grounds on which action under sub­ section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of BNNS is sought to be taken. The concerned authority must give the convict an opportunity to file a reply and of being heard. After that, the authority must pass an order stating the reasons in brief. The convict can always challenge the order of cancellation of remission by adopting a remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.; and (vi) Registration of a cognizable offence against the convict, per se, is not a ground to cancel the remission order. The allegations of breach of condition cannot be taken at their face value, and whether a case for cancellation of remission is made out will have to be decided in the facts of each case. Every case of breach cannot invite cancellation of the order of remission. The appropriate Government will have to consider the nature of the breach alleged against the convict. A minor or a trifling breach cannot be a ground to cancel remission. There must be some material to substantiate the allegations of breach. Depending upon the seriousness and gravity thereof, action can be taken under sub­section (3) of Section 432 Criminal Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023 Page 16 of 17of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS of cancellation of the order remitting sentence. 18.

--- JUDGMENT 81 ---
2024 INSC 809 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 757 OF 2015 UMA & ANR. …APPELLANT(S) VERSUS THE STATE REP. BY THE DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE …RESPONDENT(S) WITH CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 67 OF 2016 J U D G M E N T SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. Introduction 1. These appeal(s) assail the correctness of the Final Judgment/Order dated 04.03.2015 passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Madras at Madurai (the “High Court”) in Criminal Appeal (MD) No. 161 of 2011 titled State Vs Uma & Ors. whereby the judgement of acquittal dated 19.10.2010 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court No.1, Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 1 of 16Thoothukudi (the “Trial Court”) in Sessions Case No.300 of 2009, has been reversed and consequently, Appellant No.1/Accused No.1 has been convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under Section 120B and 302 of the IPC together with a fine of Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten Thousand); and Appellant No.2/Accused No.3 has been convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under Section 120B read with 302 of the IPC together with a fine of Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten Thousand). Pertinently, Ravi i.e., Accused No.2 was convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under Section 120B and 302 of the IPC together with a fine of Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten Thousand) (the “Impugned Order”). Ravi i.e., Accused No.2 has assailed the correctness of the Impugned Order before this Hon’ble Court by way of a separate criminal appeal i.e., Criminal Appeal No. 67 of 2016. As the appeal(s) arise out of a common judgement, they have been heard together; are being disposed of by this Judgement. Case of the Prosecution 2. It is the case of the prosecution that on 23.08.2008, Ms. Rajalakshmi (the “Deceased”) was murdered by her husband, Mr. Ravi (Accused No.2) and her aunt & uncle i.e. Ms. Uma (Accused No.1) and Mr. Balasubramanian (Accused No.3). Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 82 ---
No.757 of 2015 Page 2 of 163. The factual matrix reveals that the marriage between the deceased Rajalaksmi and the Accused No.2 had been solemnized at Arthi Thirumana Mandapam, Vilathikulam on 10.02.2008. At the time of marriage, 50 sovereign of gold jewels; and vessels and other items worth Rs.50,000/- (Indian Rupees Fifty Thousand) were given to the Husband and his family. As revealed by P.W.-1, Mr. Chandrakasan (PW-1), the adoptive father of the deceased in his examination, one week after the marriage, the Deceased had informed him, that Accused No.2 continuously harasses her & treated her like a servant. It was further stated that Accused No.2 used to consume alcohol, play cards, and also had an illegal illicit relationship with his aunt, i.e., Accused No.1. P.W.-1 in the Complaint (Exhibit P-1) and his examination as P.W.-1, stated that on one occasion Accused Nos. 1 and 2 along with Deceased came to his house, and Accused Nos. 1 and 2 slept together in a single bedsheet in the hall while the Deceased slept in the bedroom. It later came to his knowledge through the Deceased that this was not an usual practice at the Appellants’ home. 4. On 23.08.2008, one Arunachalam had informed P.W.-1 that the Deceased has consumed paint and had been taken to the local hospital. It was upon receiving the said information, P.W.-1 and his wife (P.W.-2) had come down to Government Hospital, Kovilpatti and found the dead body of the deceased in the Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 3 of 16mortuary. Subsequent thereto, P.W.-1 gave a written Complaint to the Sub Inspector of Police (P.W.-15) exhibited as Exhibit P-1, which was registered as Crime No. 183 of 2008 under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is highlighted that none of the accused persons i.e., the Appellants, informed the P.W. 1 or the family of the deceased of her death. 5. The contents of the Complaint, reveal glaring details of the disturbing circumstances & troubles that the Deceased was being subjected to, by the Appellants at the time of her marriage and the said details, have been substantiated & corroborated by P.W.-1 in his cross-examination. The wife of P.W.-1 i.e., Ms. Sooriya Kalavathi has also adduced identical circumstances in her evidence, which affirm the allegations of the de-facto complainant. Notwithstanding thereto, such evidence needs to be tested on the anvil of consistency with the circumstances.

--- JUDGMENT 83 ---
The said assertion of the prosecution is substantiated with medical evidence which reveal ante-mortem injuries sustained by the deceased. The Postmortem Report i.e., Exhibit P-3 prepared by Dr. Venkatesh, P.W.-10 reveals that 3 external injuries over the left upper arm, left shoulder, right shoulder and neck & the hyoid bone was found to be broken. The relevant extract of Postmortem Report is reproduced as under: “1. Multiple contusions over left arm upper 1/3rd and left shoulder (anterior aspect) each of size 2 x 2 cms (3 Nos) 2. Multiple contusions right shoulder (anterior aspect) 3. Contusion in front of neck 6 x 2 cm extending from right sternocleidomastoid to left sternocleidomastoid.” 8. P.W.-10, Dr. Venkatesh, in his examination-in-chief further makes it clear that the fracture on the hyoid bone was found broken before the demise of the Deceased. He disclosed that the death of the Deceased occurred from suffocation in breathing. There was no chance of consuming liquid for a person whose hyoid/Navaldi bone had been fractured and the person could have died due to pressure on the neck & problem in breathing. The Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 84 ---
A. No.757 of 2015 Page 5 of 16relevant extract of his examination-in-chief is reproduced as under: “I started the Postmortem at 4.15 p.m. Rigor Mortis present in hands and legs. The dead body was kept lying on its back. There are external injuries. It was broken on the inner side. Food pipe was found callus. At 5.15 p.m., the Postmortem was completed. Internal organs of the dead body were sent to Chemical analysis. Navaldi bone was sent to the professor. In the Navaldi bone investigation, it was found broken before the death. Based on the report, Chemical Analysis Department, there is no poison found on the internal ~ organs, I have stated the said information in the Postmortem Report. I opined the aforesaid person would have died due to the pressure given to aforesaid person on his neck and I issued the Postmortem Report Ex.P.3. Visera Report is Ex.P.4.” ……. The wounds 1 and 2 noted in the Post Mortem Report would have caused due to the pressure made on his neck. Blood clots in the neck and the congestion in the food pipe due to pressing of the neck. The fracture of Navaldi bone found on the internal side is caused due to the pressure made on the neck. There is no chance of liquid consumption to a person whose Navaldi bone was fractured. There is no chance for demise of a person whose Navaldi bone was fractured. Breathing problem may be caused and then the death may occur.” 9. P.W.-11, Muppidathi, Scientific Assistant, who prepared the Viscera Report, also deposed on 18.09.2008 that there was no Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 6 of 16poison found in the internal organs of the deceased and it was her ultimate opinion that the Deceased appeared to have died of compression over neck. The Postmortem Report prepared by Dr. Venkatesh, Assistant Doctor (P.W.-10) as well as Exhibit P-4 (Visera Report) prepared by the Muppidathi, Scientific Assistant, clearly establish that the Deceased had sustained external as well as internal ante-mortem injuries, which could not have been a natural consequence of consuming paint, as alleged by the Appellants. 10. A cumulative reading of the medical record along with deposition of P.W.-1 to P.W.-4 create a chain of circumstances, that establish that the death of the deceased is homicidal. It has been submitted by the Prosecution that the injuries sustained by the Deceased are ante-mortem in nature, and in view of the fact that the Deceased and the Appellants were related and more importantly, resided together at the time of occurrence it was incumbent upon the Appellants to prove as to how the death of the Deceased occurred in view of the burden contemplated under Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 (the “Evidence Act”). In this context, it is the Prosecution’ case that the Appellants have not only failed to offer any alternative explanation so as to the cause of death of the Deceased, but also failed to dent to Prosecutions’ version vis-à-vis their sole presence at the scene of the alleged offence, thereby being unable Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 7 of 16to negate the contention that no one else could have inflicted the said injuries on the body of the Deceased. 11. It is the case of the Prosecution that the Appellants had a clear motive to eliminate the Deceased i.e., the illicit/incestuous relationship between Accused no. 1, Ms. Uma and Accused No.2, Mr. Ravi, which has subsequently become a stumbling block between the Deceased i.e., Rajalakshmi and the aforenoted Appellants. This naturally, swelled the common intention of the accused persons to murder the Deceased. This factum coupled with the narrative of P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 read together with the medical evidence as well as the deposition of the doctors substantiates the culpability of the accused persons to murder the Deceased. It is urged that the case of the Prosecution does not rest on circumstantial evidence alone and corresponds to circumstances so complete, that they point towards the guilt of the Accused Persons/Appellants. Findings of the Trial Court and the Appellate/High Court 12. The Trial Court has concluded that the case of the Prosecution is not proved beyond reasonable doubt and hence, the Appellant are entitled to an acquittal. It was observed despite the medical evidence on record, Courts can prefer to accept the eyewitness testimony(ies) in preference to the opinion of a medical expert. In the absence of any direct ocular evidence, the Trial Court did not consider it appropriate to award due to the Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 8 of 16medical evidence. The Trial Court, came to the conclusion that the motive alluded to the Appellants i.e., of being embroiled in an illegal/illicit relationship was held to be highly artificial and unbelievable. In these circumstances together, the Trial Court held that the Appellants were not guilty of the offences under sections 120B, 302, 201 IPC and Section 4A of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act. 13. Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the Trial Court, an appeal came to be preferred before the High Court. The High Court has reversed the findings of the Trial Court; and convicted the Appellant(s) for inter alia the murder of the Deceased i.e, Rajalakshmi. In its considered opinion, the High Court after a thorough re-appreciation of the entire evidence on record, held that the Postmortem Report supported the case of the Prosecution that the death of Rajalakshmi was homicidal on account of the clear motive ascribed to the Appellants, and the presence of the Appellants at the time of occurrences of incident. The aforenoted conclusion was substantiated on the basis of evidence of P.W-1 to P.W.-4.

--- JUDGMENT 85 ---
Submissions of the Parties 14. It is the case of the Appellant that it is settled law that a judgment by the Trial Court could have only been reversed by the High Court if the view taken was not a plausible view on the evidence on record or there is an error apparent/perversity. The Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 9 of 16High Court in the present case has not given any reason why the view taken by the Trial Court was not a sustainable or plausible view as it not commented on any findings of the Trial Court nor has marshaled all evidence before itself before coming to the conclusion of guilt of the Appellants. It was submitted that, in cases where another view is possible, the more liberal outlook ought to be preferred and must not ordinarily be displaced. 15. It was further stressed that the case of the Prosecution is entirely based on a presumption, insofar as there was no material to establish the alleged story of P.W.-1; and there is no evidence on record to establish the motive of the Appellants to murder the Deceased. It was contended that there was nothing on record to establish that the Appellants were residing together and were present at the time of occurrence of the said incident. 16. The Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant(s) submitted that that the presence of the tin of paint is demonstrable from the Observation Mahazar (Ex P.8), however there is also nothing to show that the Appellants had inflicted the injuries on the Deceased. In this respect, it is also stated the observation made by the Hon’ble High Court vis-à-vis the shift of burden of proof under Section 106 CrPC to prove a certain fact, strictly within the knowledge of the Appellants is wholly erroneous. 17. It is further submitted that the entire case of the Prosecution rests upon a confession of the Appellant No.1, Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 10 of 16however the same is struck by Section 27 of the Evidence Act and hence cannot be admissible in the court of law in order to bring home the guilt of the present Appellants. 18. Per contra, the Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent State defended the Impugned Order, it was submitted that that the Trial Court did not appreciate the evidence in a proper manner; and consequently, this glaring error led to the acquittal of the accused persons i.e., the Appellants. It was further submitted that the testimonies of P.W.-3 and P.W.-4 were incorrectly rejected by the Trial Court as purely circumstantial, whereas the entire set of facts read together with the medical evidence, strictly point towards the guilt of the Appellants. It was further submitted that once a grave error is found in the decision of the Trial Court, the High Court was fully empowered to re- appreciate the entire evidence and reach a different conclusion. Analysis & Conclusions 19. The case of the Prosecution rests on circumstantial evidence, the testimonies of P.W.-1 to P.W.-4 read with the reports of medical examination (Exhibit P.3), Postmortem Report (Exhibit P.4.) and the evidence of the doctors. Admittedly there are no direct eyewitness to the said incident. In such cases, an inference of guilt must be sought to be drawn from a cogently and firmly established chain of circumstances. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 86 ---
This Court in its decision in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116, has laid down following five golden principles, which constitutes the panchsheel of proof, for a case based on circumstantial evidence: insofar as the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, and the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency; they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved; there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused. 21. The prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt, established the complete chain of circumstances including the; (i) motive (ii) presence of the Appellants at the time of incident (iii) false explanation in the statement under Section 313 of the CrPC (iv) the conduct of the Appellants before and after the incident & most pertinently (v) the medical evidence; which in all human probability only correspond to the guilt of the Appellants. 22. At the outset, the medical evidence in the present case, clearly shows that the Deceased i.e., Rajalakshmi had sustained multiple ante-mortem injuries, including external injuries over the left upper arm, left shoulder, right shoulder and neck. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 87 ---
A. No.757 of 2015 Page 12 of 16Pertinently, the Deceased’s hyoid bone was also found to be broken. P.W.-10. in his deposition discloses that the death of the Deceased occurred from suffocation in breathing & there was no chance of consuming liquid for a person whose hyoid/Navaldi bone had been fractured. It was deposed that Deceased could have died due to pressure on the neck & problem in breathing. P.W.-11 also noted that no poison found in the internal organs of the Deceased and it was her ultimate opinion that the deceased appeared to have died of compression over neck. The medical record clearly establishes that the Deceased had died due to external injuries, which could not have been a natural consequence of consuming paint, as alleged by the Appellants. 23. The presence of the Appellants at the time and place of incident is demonstrable from their conduct before and after the incident. In their defence under section 313 CrPC, the Appellants have stated that all 3 of them had went to Keela Earal to attend a function in the Tractor Company. They returned home only at 6 P.M. and found the deceased in an unconscious stage and they took her to the hospital. Admittedly, the Appellants had taken the deceased to the local hospital, however, none of the Appellants have been able to establish an alibi at the time of the incident. The silence of the Appellants in informing P.W.-1 or the family of the deceased of her death, also speaks volume of their conduct. Undisputedly, the Appellants and the Deceased resided together Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 13 of 16since the marriage of the Deceased to Accused No.2, which substantiates their presence at the time of occurrence of the incident; and consequently the invocation of Section 106 of the Evidence Act cannot be faulted. 24. In the case of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra, [2006] Supp.

--- JUDGMENT 88 ---
(7) S.C.R. 156, this Court has pointed out that there are two important consequences that play out when an offence is said to have taken place in the privacy of a house, where the accused is said to have been present. Firstly, the standard of proof expected to prove such a case based on circumstantial evidence is lesser than other cases of circumstantial evidence. Secondly, the appellant would be under a duty to explain as to the circumstances that led to the death of the deceased. In that sense, there is a limited shifting of the onus of proof. If he remains quiet or offers a false explanation, then such a response would become an additional link in the chain of circumstances. In terms of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, the Appellants have not discharged their burden that the injuries sustained by the deceased were not homicidal and not inflicted by them. 25. There is also enough evidence adduced by the Prosecution to hold that the Appellants had the clear motive to eliminate the Deceased. An illicit/incestuous relationship between Accused No.-1 i.e., Ms. Uma and Accused No.-2 i.e., Mr. Ravi had become Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 14 of 16known to the Deceased Rajalakshmi & her family, and she had become a stumbling block in the relationship, which swelled the common intention of the Appellants to murder her. The factum that the Deceased has passed away within six months of her marriage also becomes a relevant consideration to attribute culpable intent of the Appellants. Although, the motive of Mr. Balasubramanian remains unclear, his aid & assistance in the commission of the crime cannot be ruled out. 26. We are hence of the opinion that the Prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused Nos. 1 and 2, with the aid & support of the Accused No.3 have murdered the deceased Rajalakshmi and strangulated her to death. 27. The collusion & motive of the accused person certainly synthesizes with the medical evidence on record, false explanation by the Appellants and the entire chain of circumstances, not leaving any link missing for the Appellants to escape from the clutches of justice. In our considered opinion, the observation of the Trial Court that in absence of a direct occurrence witness, motive to commit the crime and the evidence being purely circumstantial in nature, the medical evidence becomes of less consequences, thus cannot be a fairly plausible view. The Trial Court has simply discarded the consistent testimonies of prosecution witnesses P.W.-1 & P.W.-2 as being Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 Page 15 of 16simply based on presumption; whereas the High Court in appeal has extensively dealt with each charge framed against the Appellants, the grounds on which the acquittal had been based and has dispelled those grounds with reasons. 28. Although, this Court is conscious of the fact that an Appellate Court must not ordinarily reverse the finding of acquittal, the High Court has been able to demonstrate perversity and non-appreciation of the materials on record. On a fresh appreciation of evidence, we also find ourselves unable to agree with the findings of the Trial Court and are of the considered view that the circumstances in this case are conclusive and a conclusion of guilt can be drawn. 29. For the reasons mentioned hereinabove, the Appeals stand dismissed. Interim applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. ……………………………………J. [BELA M. TRIVEDI] ……………………………………J. [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] NEW DELHI OCTOBER 22, 2024 Crl. A.

--- JUDGMENT 89 ---
Leave Granted. 2. This appeal impugns judgment and order of the High Court1dated 01.02.2024 passed in Cr. M.P. No.3796 of 2018 whereby, exercising powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732, the High Court quashed the order dated 20.02.2020, by which cognizance was taken, and all 1 High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi 2 CrPC Page 1 of 11further proceedings in connection with Case No.78 of 2016, registered at P.S. Sakchi, corresponding to G.R. No.1627 of 2016, pending in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate3, Jamshedpur. Factual Matrix 3. The appellant (original complainant) filed an application, under Section 156(3) CrPC, alleging that the second and third respondents (original accused) offered to take appellant’s Truck (Trailor No.NL 01K 1250) on a monthly rent of Rs.33,000, exclusive of driver’s/helper’s salary, for plying it between Tata Steel Jamshedpur and Kalinganagar; pursuant to that offer, an agreement was entered into between the appellant and the accused on 10.07.2014 thereby letting the vehicle to the accused for a period up to 31.03.2016 with effect from 14.07.2014; and, in furtherance thereof, possession of the Truck was given to the accused. In return, they paid one month rent, after deducting TDS. But thereafter, though the Truck had been in possession of the accused since July 2014, 3 CJM Page 2 of 11rent including arrears amounting to Rs.12,49,780 was not paid despite repeated false assurances. 4. On the aforesaid application under Section 156(3) CrPC, the learned CJM vide order dated 12.11.2016 directed the police to institute a case and investigate. 5. During investigation when despite notice under Section 41A CrPC the accused did not appear, the police applied to the CJM for issuance of NBW4 against the accused. The said application was allowed vide order dated 30.06.2017.

--- JUDGMENT 90 ---
6. Aggrieved with the order dated 30.06.2017, the second and third respondents filed application under Section 482 CrPC for quashing the aforesaid order as well as proceedings pursuant to the FIR5 registered as Case No.78 of 2016 at P.S. Sakchi. 7. In the application under Section 482 CrPC it was, inter alia, alleged that no agreement was executed; that appellant intended to let out his Truck parked inside Tata Steel Factory, but, despite payment of advance rent of one month, necessary papers concerning the Truck were not provided, therefore, no agreement was executed; and even if it is taken that agreement 4 Non-bailable Warrant 5 First Information Report Page 3 of 11was executed, no offence punishable under Sections 406 and 420 IPC is made out. 8. While the application under Section 482 CrPC was pending before the High Court, on a police report, cognizance was taken by CJM on 20.02.2020 and processes were issued under Section 204 CrPC. Consequently, respondent nos. 2 and 3 (original accused) sought amendment in their prayer before the High Court so as to include the prayer to quash the cognizance order. 9. The High Court vide impugned order quashed the order of cognizance and all further proceedings in the case concerned while leaving it open to the original complainant to take recourse to civil remedies. Reasoning of the High Court 10. The High Court reasoned thus: a. There is no allegation of entrustment in the FIR, therefore, offence of criminal breach of trust, punishable under Section 406 IPC6, is not made out. 6 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 Page 4 of 11b. Admittedly, one month rent was paid, therefore, dishonest intention from the very beginning was not there. The application is only for recovery of rent, which can be realised by taking recourse to appropriate civil proceeding. Hence, no offence punishable under Section 420 IPC is made out. 11. Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, original complainant is before us. 12. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the materials on record. Submissions on behalf of Appellant 13.

--- JUDGMENT 91 ---
b. The High Court did not consider the materials collected during investigation which resulted in filing of charge sheet. As charge sheet was submitted, the High Court ought to have considered the materials collected during Page 5 of 11investigation before concluding whether offence has been committed or not. c. The High Court failed to consider that whereabouts of the Truck was not known. Otherwise also, since the Truck was not returned, it could be taken that it has been misappropriated or disposed of by the accused in violation of the agreement, thereby disclosing commission of an offence of criminal breach of trust. Submissions on behalf of Accused-respondents 14. On behalf of accused respondent(s), it was submitted: a. The FIR did not disclose commission of any offence, therefore the High Court was justified in quashing the entire proceeding. b. There was no specific allegation in the FIR regarding disposal or misappropriation of the Truck, hence no case of criminal breach of trust was made out. c. The offence of cheating is not made out inasmuch as dishonest intention from the very Page 6 of 11beginning is not disclosed by the averments in the FIR. d. The High Court was justified in quashing the cognizance order and further proceedings. Submissions on behalf of State 15. On behalf of State, it is submitted through an affidavit that the original complainant had informed that as per agreement between the parties, the Truck/Trailor was rented to the accused for plying. However, Truck’s present location was neither known to the original complainant nor could be ascertained despite hectic efforts. Analysis 16. Before we proceed to test the correctness of the impugned order, we must bear in mind that at the stage of deciding whether a criminal proceeding or FIR, as the case may be, is to be quashed at the threshold or not, the allegations in the FIR or the police report or the complaint, including the materials collected during investigation or inquiry, as the case may be, are to be taken at their face value so as to determine whether a prima facie case for investigation or proceeding against the accused, as the case may be, is made Page 7 of 11out. The correctness of the allegations is not to be tested at this stage. 17. To commit an offence, unless the penal statute provides otherwise, mens rea is one of the essential ingredients. Existence of mens rea is a question of fact which may be inferred from the act in question as well as the surrounding circumstances and conduct of the accused. As a sequitur, when a party alleges that the accused, despite taking possession of the Truck on hire, has failed to pay hire charges for months together, while making false promises for its payment, a prima facie case, reflective of dishonest intention on the part of the accused, is made out which may require investigation. In such circumstances, if the FIR is quashed at the very inception, it would be nothing short of an act which thwarts a legitimate investigation. 18. It is trite law that FIR is not an encyclopedia of all imputations. Therefore, to test whether an FIR discloses commission of a cognizable offence what is to be looked at is not any omission in the accusations but the gravamen of the accusations contained therein to find out whether, prima facie, some cognizable offence has been committed or not. At this Page 8 of 11stage, the Court is not required to ascertain as to which specific offence has been committed. It is only after investigation, at the time of framing charge, when materials collected during investigation are before the Court, the Court has to draw an opinion as to for commission of which offence the accused should be tried. Prior to that, if satisfied, the Court may even discharge the accused. Thus, when the FIR alleges a dishonest conduct on the part of the accused which, if supported by materials, would disclose commission of a cognizable offence, investigation should not be thwarted by quashing the FIR. 19. No doubt, a petition to quash the FIR does not become infructuous on submission of a police report under Section 173 (2) of the CrPC, but when a police report has been submitted, particularly when there is no stay on the investigation, the Court must apply its mind to the materials submitted in support of the police report before taking a call whether the FIR and consequential proceedings should be quashed or not. More so, when the FIR alleges an act which is reflective of a dishonest conduct of the accused.

--- JUDGMENT 92 ---
Page 9 of 1120. In the instant case, the FIR alleges that the accused took original complainant’s Truck/ Trailor on hire for a period starting from 14.07.2014 up to 31.03.2016 at a monthly rent of Rs.33,000/- but, after payment of 1st month rent, the rent was not paid despite false assurances. The allegation that rent was not paid by itself, in ordinary course, would presuppose retention of possession of the vehicle by the accused. In such circumstances as to what happened to that Truck becomes a matter of investigation. If it had been dishonestly disposed of by the accused, it may make out a case of criminal breach of trust. Therefore, there was no justification to quash the FIR at the threshold without looking into the materials collected during the course of the investigation. 21. In our view, the High Court ought to have considered the materials collected during investigation before taking a call on the prayer for quashing the FIR, the cognizance order and the proceedings in pursuance thereof. 22. To peruse the police report and to understand as to what type of investigation was carried out by the police, on 19.07.2024 we required the State to place the charge-sheet on record. However, unfortunately, though the State filed its Page 10 of 11affidavit, the charge-sheet was not produced. The affidavit filed by the State only indicates that they were not able to trace out the Truck/ Trailor. In these circumstances, we have no option but to remit the matter to the High Court to decide the quashing petition afresh in accordance with law after considering the materials collected by the investigating agency during the course of the investigation. 23. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the High Court is set aside. The quashing petition shall be restored to its original number and shall be decided afresh by the High Court in accordance with law and in the light of the observations above. All contentions and pleas are kept open for the parties to urge before the High Court. 24. Pending application(s), if any stand disposed of. ......................................J.

--- JUDGMENT 93 ---
2129 of 20143. The case of the prosecution, in succinct, was as under: - ‘On 01.10.1996, at about 1.00 pm, the respondents herein viz., Ramjan Khan, Musaf Khan @ Musab Khan and Habib Khan, by cutting/beating with sickle, axe and stick caused death of Naseem Khan, near the village well of Karaikheda and thereby committed the crime punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34, of the Indian Penal Code (for short the ‘IPC’).’ 4. As mentioned above, the respondents herein were tried by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Sironj. The prosecution had examined 19 witnesses including Haseen Khan (PW-5) and Farid Khan (PW-9), who are the real brothers of deceased Naseem Khan and eye witnesses. Documentary evidence including the postmortem report prepared by Dr. S.S. Thakur (PW-1) were tendered by the prosecution. On the side of the defence two witnesses were examined. 5. The trial Court relied on the oral testimonies of PW- 5 and PW-9, the minor brothers of the deceased besides the testimony of PW-8, the mother of the deceased who happened to be the informant and the further found that the ocular evidence got corroboration from the medical evidence, to enter conviction on the appellants for Page 2 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014having committed murder of Naseem Khan. Consequently, the respondents herein were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs. 35,000/-. The respondents herein, the convicts preferred appeal jointly, against the judgment of conviction for the offence punishable under Section 302, IPC read with Section 34, IPC and the life sentence imposed therefor, the High Court acquitted them of the offences with which they were charged and allowed the appeal in the impugned judgment of acquittal. 6. Before dealing with the rival contentions raised before us, we think it only appropriate to refer to some of the relevant decisions of this Court laying law in regard to appeal against acquittal. It is true that the judgment of acquittal was passed after setting aside the judgment of conviction passed against the respondents herein by the trial Court. 7. In the decision in Jai Karan & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 94 ---
v. State of U.P.1 this Court held that where the trial Court and the High Court had concurrently found the accused guilty, the Supreme Court would not scrutinize the evidence once again, unless there has been a total miscarriage of 1 (2003) 12 SCC 655 Page 3 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014justice. We may hasten to add here that this Court may have to re-appreciate evidence in cases where a prima facie perverse appreciation of evidence is brought out, even in such cases. We shall also not be understood to have held that merely because the trial Court and the High Court have rendered divergent findings, this Court should invariably scrutinize the evidence once again and in that regard this Court should entertain an appeal. In an appeal, against conviction in murder case under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short the ‘CrPC’), a proper analysis of the evidence and accepting or rejecting, the appreciation of evidence by the trial Court must reflect in the judgment of the High Court. In other words, the disposal of the appeal under Section 374, CrPC, shall not be by cryptic or non- reasoned order. In the decision in Govindaraju v. State by Sivaramapuram PS2, this Court held that a very vital distinction has to be kept in mind while dealing with appeal under Section 374, CrPC, that interference would be justifiable only when distinction is kept between perversity in appreciation of evidence and mere possibility of another view. Furthermore, it was 2 (2012) 4 SCC 722 Page 4 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014held therein that it would not be appropriate for the High Court to merely record that the judgment of the trial Court was perverse without specifically dealing with the facets of perversity relating to the issues of law and/or appreciation of evidence, as otherwise such observation of the High Court would not be sustainable in law. 8. Having taken note of the position settled thus we may add that when the High Court acquitted the convict(s) in the appeal filed under Section 374, CrPC, in reversal of conviction, by granting the benefit of doubt after a proper appreciation of evidence interference is permissible and justifiable only if it is infected with perversity in troth, the prosecution was not successful in establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. In the decision in State of U.P. v. Dharmaraj and Anr.3, which involved a challenge against a judgment of acquittal in a murder case by the High Court, this Court held that when on facts the view taken by the High Court was a reasonably possible view, though not the only view that could be taken, interference with acquittal would be uncalled for. 3 (2003) 9 SCC 39 Page 5 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 20149. Bearing in mind the aforesaid decisions and the fact that the trial Court and the High Court are at issue on the question whether the respondents are guilty in the case on hand, we will proceed to consider the captioned appeal. Obviously, the trial Court relied on the oral testimonies of PWs 5, 8 and 9 whereas in the appeal the High Court found the oral evidence of PWs 5, 8 and 9 as unreliable. 10. Before dealing with the oral testimonies of the minor brothers of the deceased (PWs 5 and 9), we will deal with the oral evidence of PW-8, the mother of the deceased. She is the informant at whose instance FIR No.78/96 was registered against the respondents herein. Though she was believed by the trial Court, on re- appreciation the High Court found her unreliable owing to the material improvements and omissions made while being examined as PW-8. It was brought out while being cross-examined that she had not deposed at all about a dying declaration made to her by the deceased son. Before analysing her evidence further, it is not inappropriate to refer to a few decisions having bearing on her testimony.

--- JUDGMENT 95 ---
12. It is true that the aforementioned decisions would undoubtedly reveal the position that an FIR is not meant to be a detailed document containing chronicle of all intricate and minute details. 13. Even after, referring to the decisions mentioned above, we think it equally relevant to refer to the decision of this Court in Dharma Rama Bhagare v. State of Maharashtra8. It was held therein thus: - “The first information report, it may be pointed out, is never treated as a substantive piece of evidence. It can only be used for corroborating or contradicting its maker when he appears in court as a witness.” 14. There can be no doubt with respect to the position that the prime object of FIR, from the point of view of the informant is to set the criminal law in motion and from the point of the investigating authorities is to obtain 4 (2003) 6 SCC 175 5 (2011) 4 SCC 324 6 (2014) 2 SCC 1 7 (2021) 1 SCC 1 8 (1973) 1 SCC 537 Page 7 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014information about the alleged activity so as to enable to take suitable steps to trace and book the guilty. Thus, it can be said that FIR is an important document, though not a substantial piece of evidence, and may be put in evidence to support or contradict the evidence of its maker viz., the informant. Whether the omission(s) is one which seriously impeaches the credibility of the witness and is sufficient to reject the testimony of the informant would depend upon the question whether it is of an important fact and whether that fact was within the knowledge of the informant, going by the case of prosecution unraveled through the witness concerned. 15. Thus, the position with respect to FIR is clear from the decisions referred supra that even though it is not meant to be an encyclopedia containing chronicle of all intricate and minute details, it could be used to corroborate its maker under Section 157 of the Evidence Act or to contradict its maker viz., the informant under Section 145 of the Evidence Act to establish whether he is a trustworthy witness or not. 16. Realising and recognizing the aforesaid position with respect to FIR we will proceed to consider whether the disinclination on the part of the High Court to rely on, Page 8 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014rather, treating the evidence of the informant – PW8 as unreliable is justifiable and sustainable in law. 17. Through the evidence of PW8, the mother of the deceased, who is also the informant, the prosecution has attempted to establish the existence of an oral dying declaration. It is to be noted that dying declaration itself is not a strong piece of evidence and therefore, when it is verbal and that too, allegedly made to a close relative (in this case allegedly to the mother), evidence of mother about the oral dying declaration was to be treated with care and caution. To show that the trial Court dealt with the same without due care and caution self- evident from paragraph 32 of the judgment of the Trial Court, which reads thus: - “32.

--- JUDGMENT 96 ---
During the arguments, ld. Counsel for the accused argued that complainant Sitara Bi has stated in her court statement that when she reached at well, at that time, her son Naseem Khan told her that all the three accused Ramjan Khan, Musab Khan and Habib Khan have caused his murder after beating him with sickle, axe and lathi. Though, this fact is not written in the police statement Exh. D-3 of Sitara Bi that when he reached, at that time, accused Naseem had told her to be beaten by accused persons, even thereafter, I don’t find it proper to give it’s benefit to the accused persons because I don’t Page 9 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014find any reason to disbelieve the statement, which has been given by her before the court.” 18. Paragraph 42 of the judgment of the Trial Court carries the further recital with respect to the aforesaid aspect and it, in so far as relevant, reads thus: - “42… Sitara Bi (PW-8) has stated in para-5 of her cross-examination that if the police has not written the fact of going of Farid Khan and Haseen Khan alongwith Naseem Khan for bathing is not written in the police statement of Exh. D-3, then, she cannot tell its reason. Similarly, when complainant Sitara Bi reached on the spot, at that time, Naseem Khan was lying on the ground and Naseem Khan told her that accused have beaten him. If, this fact is also not written in her police statement, then she cannot tell its reason...” 19. The Judgment of the Trial Court would reveal that after considering the aforesaid aspect in such a light manner, believing the oral evidence of PW8 as well, the Trial Court arrived at the finding that accused Ramjan Khan had beaten Naseem Khan with sickle, accused Musab had beaten him with bamboo lathi (equipped with Farsa) and accused Habib inflicted axe blow on Naseem Khan and thereby caused his murder. Page 10 of 21 Criminal Appeal No.

--- JUDGMENT 97 ---
2129 of 201420. The undisputed and indisputable position obtained from the evidence on record is that the defence had brought out that neither in Ext. P12 FIR nor in Ext. D3 statement of PW8 recorded under Section 161, CrPC, PW8 stated about the oral dying declaration made to her by the deceased. That apart, the prosecution had failed to establish that when PW8 reached the place of occurrence the deceased was in a fit state of mind to speak or talk relevantly. Except the statement of PW8 in the Court there is no scrap of evidence in that regard in the case on hand. As a matter of fact, on this aspect nothing was brought out from PW5 and PW9 or from any other witnesses. There can be no doubt that oral dying declaration should be of such a nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in its correctness. In the contextual situation revealed as above, we have no hesitation to hold that the High Court was perfectly justified in considering the oral testimony of PW8 and taking serious note of the serious omission brought out from her, on being confronted with Ext. P12 FIR and Ext. D3, which is her previous statement made to police, that she had not stated anything about such an oral dying declaration made by her deceased son. The High Court also took note of the fact that neither PW5 nor PW9 had Page 11 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014spoken about any such oral dying declaration made by the deceased brother to their mother- PW8. Add to it, the oral testimony of PW8 would reveal that while being examined-in-chief she deposed what Haseen Khan (PW5) and Fareed Khan (PW9) divulged to her. She would depose: “When my sons Fareed Khan and Haseen Khan told me at home that accused persons have killed Naseem Khan then I reached the place of incident.” (underline supplied) 21. In this context, it is also relevant to refer to her oral evidence while being cross-examined. She deposed thus on being cross-examined: - “It is incorrect to say that Fareed and Haseen did not tell me that accused persons have killed Naseem.” 22. The oral testimony of PW-8 would further go to show that with respect to the attack allegedly done by the three accused persons viz., the respondents herein on her deceased son Naseem Khan, her evidence is nothing but ‘hearsay evidence’ as according to her she was told about their attack on Naseem Khan only by her sons, PW- 5 and PW-9 and there is no case for the prosecution that she had witnessed the respondents herein attacking Naseem Khan. Page 12 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 201423. A scanning of the oral testimony of PW-8 would show that on many other materials points the defence could brought out, upon confronting her with Ext.P12- FIR, Ext.D3-previous statement, various serious omissions. About her statement in Court that PW-5 and PW-9 went along with deceased Naseem Khan on 01.10.1996 for taking bath nothing was seen recorded in Ext.D3. As noted earlier, as to the alleged oral dying declaration made to her by the deceased from the place of occurrence after sustaining injuries nothing was recorded in Ext.P12-FIR as also in Ext.D3. Though she deposed that upon seeing her Ramjan, Musaf Khan and Habib Khan ran away from the place of occurrence this fact was not recorded in Ext.D3. So also, about the attack by the accused persons on deceased Naseem Khan though she deposed that PW-5 and PW-9 told her and in turn she told such facts to police they were not recorded in Ext.D3. She would depose that she got no enmity with the family of accused persons and got no dispute in respect of land. In view of the aforementioned aspects revealed from the testimony of PW-8 which were not given due weight by the trial Court while considering whether PW-8 is reliable or not, we are of the considered view that the High Court had rightly given due Page 13 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014consideration to all such aspects and ultimately discredited her testimony. 24. Before considering the oral testimonies of the witnesses claimed by the prosecution as eye witnesses, it is to be noted that with respect to the nature of death of Naseem Khan there is actually no cleavage in the findings of the trial Court and the High Court. The concurrent finding is that it is culpable homicide amounting to murder. The necroscopical evidence consists of the oral testimony of PW-1, Dr. S.S. Thakur, and the postmortem report prepared and proved by him as Ext.P1. Going by the said necroscopical evidence the following antemortem injuries were present on the body of the Naseem Khan: - “1. A punctured wound measuring ½ inch x ½ inch on the left side of face, clotted blood was present. 2. An incised wound measuring 1 inch x ½ inch on the ½, 1/3 portion back side of left wrist, which was having the clotted blood. 3. An incised wound measuring 3 inch x ½ inch x deep to bone, margin on the occipital region of head having clotted blood. Page 14 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 20144. An incised wound measuring 3 inch x. ½ inch x deep bone, on the frontal region of head, having clotted blood. 5. An incised wound measuring 3 x ½ inch x dee on the temporal region of left side of head, in which the clotted blood was present.” 25. PW-1 opined that all the aforesaid injuries except injury Nos.1 and 2 were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death and that the cause of death was comma as a result of head injuries. In short, in view of the necroscopical evidence as above the Courts were perfectly right in holding that the death of Naseem Khan is culpable homicide amounting to murder. 26. Now, the surviving question is only whether the prosecution had succeeded in establishing conclusively beyond any reasonable doubt that the culprits for the murder of Naseem Khan, are the respondents herein as held by the trial Court or whether they are entitled to the benefit of doubt and consequential acquittal as held by the High Court. In the decision in Anil Phukan v. State of Assam9, this Court held that conviction could be based on testimony of a single witness provided his testimony is found reliable and inspires confidence. In 9 (1993) 3 SCC 282 Page 15 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014the decision in Chandu Bhai Shana Bhai Parmar v. State of Gujarat10, this Court held that when the ocular evidence in a murder case is unreliable benefit of doubt to be given to all accused. 27. We have already held, for the reasons given earlier, that the High Court had rightly held the oral testimony of PW-8 as unreliable. As a matter of fact, the case of the prosecution is that Isab Khan (PW-2), Haseen Khan (PW-5), Fareed Khan (PW-9), and Anees Khan (PW- 17) had witnessed the incident that led to the death of Naseem Khan. In the light of the decisions in Anil Phukan’s case and Chandu Bhai’s case (supra) the oral testimonies of PWs 2, 5, 9 & 17 are to be appreciated to answer the aforementioned surviving question. PW-2 was declared hostile by the prosecution and concurrently his evidence was held unreliable. Though PW-17 also turned hostile, the trial Court held that on that account the accused / the respondents herein are not entitled to any benefit as PW-5 and PW-9 proved the fact that accused/the respondents herein had caused murder of Naseem Khan using sickle, danda affixed with farsa, and axe. However, the High Court held the evidence of 10 AIR 1982 SC 1022 Page 16 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014PW-17 as unreliable. The High Court found that though PW-17 was declared hostile prior to such declaration he deposed that the accused Ramjan/the first respondent herein had thrown the deceased on a stone boulder. He had not deposed anything against the other accused / the other respondents herein. The High Court found his testimony unreliable as according to him the first respondent Ramjan threw the deceased on a stone boulder which caused head injuries, but that is not the case of the prosecution at all and that apart he had stated so, for the first time only in the Court. In that regard he was confronted with his previous statement - Ext.P22. Besides the same, there is nothing in the opinion of PW- 1, the Doctor who conducted autopsy on the body of Naseem Khan, which would indicate that the head injury was caused on account of the deceased being thrown on the stone boulder. When that be the nature of evidence of PW-17, it can only be held that the finding of the trial Court that the evidence of PW-17 would not fetch any benefit for the accused cannot be sustained. Hence, according to us, the High Court held his evidence unreliable correctly. 28. In the aforesaid circumstances the question is with respect to the reliability on the oral testimonies of PW-5 Page 17 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014and PW-9 who are the younger brothers of deceased Naseem Khan. As noticed hereinbefore, their oral testimonies were held as reliable by the trial Court and at the same time the High Court found their testimonies as unreliable. At the outset, it is to be noted that as in the case of PW-8, the defence had succeeded in bringing out the fact that both PW-5 and PW-9 had omitted to mention certain material facts to police while their statements were recorded. The question is whether they were omissions tantamounting to discredit the said witnesses. PW-5, while being examined in chief, deposed to have seen Ramjan causing injury by parena (sickle), Musaf Khan causing injury by stick and Habib causing injury by axe on his brother Naseem Khan. However, during cross- examination he would depose that regarding the infliction of injuries by the respondents using the aforementioned weapons on Naseem Khan, he did not make any statement before the police and stated so for the first time before the Court. PW-2, Isab Khan, and PW- 17, Anees Khan, are respectively the sons of Yaseem Khan and Mohar Khan, who are the cousin brothers of Munne Khan, the father of PWs 5 and 9. As noticed hereinbefore, both PW-2 and PW-17 did not support the case of the prosecution.

--- JUDGMENT 98 ---
High Court also took note of the Page 18 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014fact that PW-5 did not depose that when he along with his mother (PW-8) reached the place of occurrence the deceased was alive and gave oral dying declaration to PW-8. 29. While being cross-examined PW-9 deposed that he did not tell the police that Ramjan with parena, Musaf Khan with farsa and, Habib Khan with axe assaulted his brother Naseem Khan. While being examined in chief he would depose that his mother was also beaten by the accused persons. It is to be noted that there is absolutely no such case even for PW-8, the mother of PW-9. As can be seen from paragraph 6 of his oral testimony the defence had brought out some other omissions and contradictions. The aforementioned omissions on the part of PWs 5 and 9 cannot be said to be minor contradictions to be taken lightly as according to them they did not name the accused persons in their previous statements made to the police. Hence, omissions thus brought amount to material contradiction which will go into the core of the prosecution case. Their oral testimonies would reveal that they stated about the infliction of injuries on Naseem Khan, their elder brother by the respondents with the weapons mentioned above for the first time only before the Court while being Page 19 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014examined. That apart, it is to be noted that though the case of the prosecution is that both PWs 5 and 9 had gone with deceased Naseem Khan for taking bath on the fateful day the evidence of PW-8 would reveal that in her previous statement to the police she had not disclosed the said fact to the police. In this context, it is relevant to note that the prosecution had not revealed, rather established, the genesis of the incident that led to the death of Naseem Khan. In other words, none of the witnesses including PWs 5 and 9 had deposed as to the genesis of the incident. This assumes relevance as PW-8 herself deposed that she got no enmity with the families of the accused and got no land dispute with them. When this be the nature of the evidence of PWs 5 and 9 as also the evidence of PWs 2, 8 and 17, we are of the considered view that there can be no good reason to hold that the prosecution had succeeded in conclusively proving the guilt of the accused/respondents herein beyond reasonable doubt warranting displacement of the finding of the High Court that in view of the omissions and contradictions, the oral testimonies of the aforesaid witnesses are not reliable and the respondents herein are entitled to the benefit of doubt. We have already taken note of the decision in Dharmaraj’s case (supra) Page 20 of 21 Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014involving a challenge against judgment of acquittal in a murder case in reversal of conviction entered against the accused by the trial Court holding that if on facts the view taken by the High Court is a reasonable possible view, though not the only view that could be taken, interference with acquittal would be uncalled for. In view of the nature of the evidence discussed above and the finding of the High Court that the respondents/accused are entitled to benefit of doubt and consequently for acquittal, we do not find any reason to hold that it is not a reasonably possible view though not the only view that could be taken. 30. The long and short of the above discussion is that we are not inclined to interfere with the judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 602 of 1998. Hence the appeal stands dismissed. ……………………, J.

--- JUDGMENT 99 ---
2024 INSC 781 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3291­3294 OF 2009 Bank of Rajasthan Ltd. … Appellant versus Commissioner of Income Tax … Respondent with Civil Appeal Nos.11200­11201 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 1445­1446 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.11202 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 4843 of 2020) Civil Appeal No.11203 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 7055 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.11204 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 7404 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.11205 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 15281 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.11196 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1686 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.11197 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1687 of 2021) Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 1 of 45Civil Appeal No.11198 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 8968 of 2018) Civil Appeal No.11199 of 2024 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 24841 of 2019) and Civil Appeal No. 4755 of 2023 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 16299 of 2023) J U D G M E N T ABHAY S. OKA, J. Leave granted in the Special Leave Petitions. 1. FACTUAL ASPECTS 2. The main issue in this group of appeals is about the treatment to be given to broken period interest. The question is whether a deduction of the broken period interest can be claimed. We must provide a brief background of how the issue arises.

--- JUDGMENT 100 ---
3. A Scheduled Bank is governed by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (for short, “the 1949 Act”). The 1949 Act, read with the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India (for short, ‘RBI’), requires Banks to purchase government securities to maintain the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (for short, ‘SLR’). The guidelines dated 16th October 2000 issued by the RBI categorise the government securities Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 2 of 45into the following three categories: (a) Held to Maturity (HTM); (b) Available for Sale (AFS); and (c) Held for Trading (HFT). 4. The interest on the securities is paid by the Government or the authorities issuing securities on specific fixed dates called coupon dates, say after an interval of six months. When a Bank purchases a security on a date which falls between the dates on which the interest is payable on the security, the purchaser Bank, in addition to the price of the security, has to pay an amount equivalent to the interest accrued for the period from the last interest payment till the date of purchase. This interest is termed as the interest for the broken period. When the interest becomes due after the purchase of the security by the Bank, interest for the entire period is paid to the purchaser Bank, including the broken period interest. Therefore, in effect, the purchaser of securities gets interest from a date anterior to the date of acquisition till the date on which interest is first due after the date of purchase. 5. Under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, ‘the IT Act’), Section 18, which was repealed by the Finance Act, 1988, dealt with tax leviable on the interest on securities. Section 19 provided for the deduction of (i) expenses in realising the interest and (ii) the interest payable on the money borrowed for investment. Section 20 dealt with the deduction of (i) expenses in realising the interest and (ii) the interest payable on money borrowed for investment in the case of a Banking Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 3 of 45company. Section 21 provided that the interest payable outside India was not admissible for deduction. Sections 18 to 21 were repealed by the Finance Act, 1988, effective from 1st April 1989. We are dealing with cases involving the period post the deletion of the four Sections.

--- JUDGMENT 101 ---
6. In Civil Appeal Nos.3291­3294 of 2009, which is the lead case, the appellant­assessee is a Scheduled Bank. The appellant was engaged in the purchase and sale of government securities. The securities were treated as stock­ in­trade in the hands of the appellant. The amount received by the appellant on the sale of the securities was considered for computing its business income. The appellant consistently followed the method of setting off and netting the amount of interest paid by it on the purchase of securities (i.e., interest for the broken period) against the interest recovered by it on the sale of securities and offering the net interest income to tax. The result is that if the entire purchase price of the security, including the interest for the broken period is allowed as a deduction, then the entire sale price of the security is taken into consideration for computing the appellant’s income. According to the appellant's case, the assessing officer allowed this settled practice while passing regular assessment orders for the assessment years 1990­91 to 1992­93. However, the Commissioner of Income Tax (for short, ‘CIT’) exercised jurisdiction under Section 263 of the IT Act and interfered with the assessment orders. The CIT held that the appellant was not entitled to the deduction of the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 4 of 45interest paid by it for the broken period. The Commissioner relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd. v. Additional Commissioner of Income Tax, Bangalore1. This Court held that under the head “interest on securities”, the interest for a broken period was not an allowable deduction. Being aggrieved by the orders of the CIT, the appellant preferred an appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘Appellate Tribunal’). The Tribunal allowed the appeal by holding that the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 was rendered after considering Sections 18 to 21 of the IT Act, which have been repealed. Therefore, the Tribunal held that as the appellant was holding the securities as stock­in­trade, the entire amount paid by the appellant for the purchase of such securities, which included interest for the broken period, was deductible. The respondent Department preferred an appeal before the High Court against the decision of the Appellate Tribunal. By the impugned judgment, the High Court interfered and, relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1, allowed the appeal. This order was impugned in Civil Appeal Nos. 3291­3294 of 2009.

--- JUDGMENT 102 ---
7. All other appeals that are the subject matter of this group are preferred by the Revenue. These are the cases where the deduction of interest for the broken period was allowed. 1 (1991) Supp (2) SCC 147 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 5 of 458. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant in Civil Appeal Nos. 3291­3294 of 2009 and learned counsel representing the respondents/Banks in other appeals have made extensive submissions. The submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the assessees can be summarised as follows: a. Reliance was placed on a decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr.2 Learned counsel pointed out that in the said decision, the Bombay High Court distinguished the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 by holding that in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1, the claim for deduction of interest on broken period was made under Sections 19 and 20 of the IT Act. This was done on the footing that the Department had brought to tax the interest accrued on the securities up to the date of purchase as “interest on securities” under Section 18. It was held that the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 will not apply to the cases post­repeal of Sections 18 to 21 of the IT Act. In the said case, the amount of interest was brought into tax under Section 28. b. The learned counsel appearing for the assessees pointed out that the view taken by the Bombay High Court in 2 (2002) 258 ITR 601 (Bombay) : 2002 SCC OnLine Bom 944 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 6 of 45the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2 has been approved by the order dated 12th August 2008 of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay v. Citi Bank NA3. The learned counsel pointed out that this Court affirmed the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Citi Bank NA3, which in turn relied upon its earlier decision in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2. c. Our attention was also invited to a decision by this Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad v. The Cocanada Radhaswami Bank Ltd., Kakinada4. Inviting our attention to the said decision, it is pointed out that this Court accepted that the securities held by Banking companies are held as stock­in­trade. He pointed out that this Court, in the case of United Commercial Bank Ltd.; Calcutta v. Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal5, held that government securities are held as stock­in­trade by Banking companies. He submitted that the assessee pays interest for the broken period to which he is not entitled as after the purchase, when the interest becomes due, the assessee gets income for the 3 Civil Appeal No. 1549 of 2006 4 (1965) 57 ITR 306 : 1965 SCC OnLine SC 186 5 (1957) 32 ITR 688 : 1957 SCC OnLine SC 74 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 7 of 45entire period even covering the interest payable before the date on which the assessee makes the acquisition. It is submitted that there cannot be any dispute that such securities held by Banking companies constitute stock­in­trade. He submitted that in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, Jalandhar v. Nawanshahar Central Cooperative Bank Ltd.6, it was held that investments are a part of the Banking business, particularly when statutorily mandated. It was submitted that Banking companies buy government securities to comply with SLR requirements. d. It is well­settled that in the Banking business, securities purchased by Banks, per se, constitute stock­in­trade of the Bank as normal and ordinary Banking business is to deal in money credit. The money is parked in readily marketable securities so that it is available to meet the demand of depositors. This argument is supported by a decision of this Court in the case of Bihar State Co­ operative Bank Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 103 ---
Commissioner of Income Tax7. e. It was contended that when the interest income of securities is uniformly assessed under the head “profits and gains from business or profession”, the decision of this Court in the case of Citi Bank NA3 will squarely 6 (2007) 289 ITR 6 : (2007) 15 SCC 611 7 (1960) 39 ITR 114 : 1960 SCC OnLine SC 193 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 8 of 45apply. It was submitted that in the case of many Banks, for several assessment years, the assessment officer allowed the deduction of interest for the broken period. Reliance was placed on a decision of this Court in the case of M/s. Radhasoami Satsang, Saomi Bagh, Agra v. Commissioner of Income Tax8. f. It was submitted that IndusInd Bank Ltd. is following a practice that interest accrued on a security but not due on the date of purchase of security is debited to the profit and loss account as expenditure and is claimed as such in return of income. The balance amount remaining after reducing the broken period interest is capitalised to the balance sheet covering the acquisition cost of such securities. It is submitted that the department has accepted the said methodology for several years. It was submitted that the exercise undertaken by Revenue in disallowing broken period interest on the footing that it is a capital expenditure is revenue neutral. It was pointed out that if the deduction of broken period interest as a capital expense is disallowed, it will have to be added to the acquisition cost of the securities, which will then be deducted from the sale proceeds when such securities are sold in the subsequent years. It was submitted that, consequently, the related interest received would have to be excluded from the income and truncated from the purchase cost, 8 (1992) 193 ITR 321 : (1992) 1 SCC 659 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 9 of 45or alternatively, both the broken interest period and interest received thereof will be netted and added/subtracted from the cost of acquisition. Therefore, the exercise done by the Department is academic. It was submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 is per incuriam as it was rendered in ignorance of the decisions of this Court in the case of Cocanada Radhaswami Bank Ltd4. Reliance was also placed on the Central Board of Direct Taxes (for short, “the CBDT”) Circular No. 665 of 1993.

--- JUDGMENT 104 ---
g. It was also pointed out that though Banks are required to maintain SLR by investing amounts in specified securities, as long as Banks maintain a specified percentage of reserve, they are permitted to buy and sell such securities, irrespective of their categorisation. There is no embargo on the Bank to hold security in SLR up to the maturity date of the security. It was submitted that Banks always treat interest income from all securities as profit or loss, irrespective of the categorisation of investments. The interest on securities held by Banks is always taxed under the head “income from business or profession”. This contention is raised by HDFC Bank. It was submitted that in accordance with the well­settled and accepted method of accounting, the amount of broken period of interest Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 10 of 45which is debited in the profit and loss account of the Bank is claimed as a deduction while computing the income from business under the head “income from business and profession” as the entire interest income is offered to tax under the said head. h. Reliance was placed on the RBI Circular dated 1st July 2009, which permits the debit of broken period interest to the profit and loss account. Reliance was also placed on a Circular dated 2nd November 2015 issued by the CBDT. The Circular provides that the investments made by a Banking company are a part of the business of the Bank. Therefore, income from such investments is attributable to the business of Banking falling under the head “profit and gain of business and profession”. i. It was submitted that assuming that as per the mandate of the 1949 Act, the securities are treated as investments in the books of accounts, it cannot be held that even for the purposes of the IT Act, securities would continue to be investments and not stock­in­trade. It was submitted that this Court has repeatedly held that the entries in the books of accounts are not relevant for determining the taxability under the provisions of the IT Act. Reliance is placed on the RBI Circular dated 1st July 2009, which provides that broken period interest is not to be capitalised as part of the cost and is required to be debited to the profit and loss account. Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc.

--- JUDGMENT 105 ---
Page 11 of 45j. It is submitted that as required by the Banking Regulation Act, all three categories of securities are treated in the same manner, and there is no distinction between the securities which are HTM and the other two categories of securities. It was submitted that Banks can always shift the securities falling in the category of HTM to the other two categories. k. It was further urged on behalf of the assessee that the plea based on distinguishing the nature of the treatment of SLR securities viz­a­viz non­SLR securities has been raised for the first time by the Revenue before this Court. l. Considering the fact that securities are held as stock­in­ trade, interest paid on them constitutes an expense which is liable to be claimed as a deduction. 9. The submission of learned ASG is that the broken period interest on security held to maturity constitutes an investment and, therefore, should be treated as capital expenditure. It was submitted that since HTM securities are held up to maturity for maintaining the SLR ratio and as the same are treated as investment in the books of accounts of Banks, the same should be treated as investment and not stock­in­trade. Another submission of ASG is that Circular No. 18 of 2015 applies only to non­SLR securities. Another submission of learned ASG is that the decision of Vijaya Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 12 of 45Bank Ltd.1 would squarely apply as while omitting Sections 18 to 21, corresponding amendments have been made in Sections 28, 56(2)(d) and 57(3) of the IT Act, and the securities are now taxable under the head of “Income from other Sources”. Therefore, the principles laid down in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 will squarely apply. He argued that the increase in capital by the acquisition of securities results in the expansion of the Bank's capital base, which helps in profit making. Therefore, the expenditure in the nature of broken period interest was capital expenditure. Learned ASG, thus, submitted that the assessees in these cases will not be entitled to a deduction of broken period interest. CONSIDERATION OF LEGAL POSITION 10.

--- JUDGMENT 106 ---
* * * * * C.—Income from house property. D.—Profits and gains of business or profession. E.—Capital gains. F.—Income from other sources.” Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 13 of 45Clause B was of “interest on securities”. It was deleted with effect from 1st April 1989 along with Sections 18 to 21, which dealt with interest on securities. Head ‘D’ is of income from “profits and gains of business or profession” covered by Section 28 of the IT Act. Profits and gains from any business or profession that the assessee carried out at any time during the previous year are chargeable to income tax. Under Section 36(1)(iii), the assessee is entitled to a deduction of the amount of interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of the business or profession. Section 37 provides that any expenditure which is not covered by Sections 30 to 36 and not being in the nature of capital expenditure, laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business or profession shall be allowed for computing the income chargeable under the head “profits and gains of business or profession”. Section 56 of the IT Act provides that income of every kind which is not to be excluded from the total income under the IT Act shall be chargeable to income tax under the head “income from other sources” if it is not chargeable to income tax under any of the five heads provided in Section 14. Therefore, interest on investments may be covered by Section 56. Section 57 provides for the deduction of expenditure not being in the nature of capital expenditure expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of making or earning such income. In the case of interest on securities, any reasonable sum paid for the purposes of realising interest is also entitled to deduction under Section 57 of the IT Act. Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc.

--- JUDGMENT 107 ---
Page 14 of 45DECISIONS STARTING FROM THE CASE OF VIJAYA BANK LTD .1 11. The first decision which needs consideration is in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. Regarding the facts of the said case, it must be noted that the income of the Bank was not assessed under Section 28 of the IT Act but under Section 18 under the Head “interest on securities”. In the context of the applicability of Section 18 of the IT Act, the Bank claimed that the broken period's interest was deductible under Sections 19 and 20. In light of these facts, this Court held that the outlay on the purchase of income­bearing assets was a capital outlay. Therefore, no part of the capital outlay can be set off as expenditure against income from the asset in question. 12. A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2, dealt with the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. We are extensively referring to the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2 for the reason that this Court in Citi Bank NA3 has expressly approved the view of the Bombay High Court in the said decision. We may note that the Bombay High Court dealt with assessment years 1974­75 to 1977­78. This was a case where the assessee made adjustments for broken period interest. The assessing officer had disallowed the deduction for the payment made by the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 15 of 45assessee for broken period interest. The assessing officer followed the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. The Bombay High Court distinguished the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 and held thus: “18. The assessee­Bank, like several other Banks, were consistently following the practice of valuing the securities/interest held by it at the end of each year and offer for taxation, the appreciation in their value by way of profit/interest earned due to efflux of time. The Bank also claimed deduction for broken period interest payments. However, the department did not accept the assessee's method in the assessment year in question in view of the judgment of the Karnataka High Court in the case of (Commissioner of Income­tax, Mysore v. Vijaya Bank)5, reported in 1976 Tax Law Reporter page 524. This judgment has been subsequently upheld by the Supreme Court in 187 I.T.R.

--- JUDGMENT 108 ---
page 541. In view of the judgment of the Karnataka High Court, the department took the view that broken period interest payment cannot be allowed as a deduction because it came within the ambit of interest on securities under section 18 of the Income­tax Act. It is the contention of the department that the assessee­Bank received interest on Dated Government Securities from R.B.I. on half­ yearly basis. That, the assessee Bank also traded in such securities. That the assessee Bank bought Dated Government Securities during the intervening period between two due dates. That, on purchase of the dated Government Security, the assessee became the holder of the security and accordingly, the assessee received half­yearly interest on the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 16 of 45due dates from R.B.I. on purchase. Therefore, according to the department, the income which the assessee­Bank received came under section 18 of the Income­tax Act interest on securities. Under the circumstances, it was not open to the assessee Bank to claim deduction for broken period interest payment made to the selling/transferor Bank. That, it was not open to the assessee to claim deduction as revenue expenditure for broken period interest payment as no such deduction was permissible under sections 19 and 20 of the Income­tax Act. That, it was not a sum expended by the assessee for realizing interest under section 19 and, therefore, the assessee was not entitled to claim deduction for broken period interest payment as a revenue expenditure under section 28 of the Income­tax Act. In this connection, the department followed the judgment of the Karnataka High Court in Vijaya Bank's case. Therefore, the point which we are required to consider in this case is: Whether the judgment of the Karnataka High Court in Vijaya Bank's case was applicable to the facts of the present case. 19. Before going further we may mention at the very outset that the security in this case was of the face value of Rs. 5, lakhs. It was bought for a lesser amount of Rs. 4,92,000.00. The difference was of Rs. 8,000.00. The assessee has revalued the security. The assessee offered the notional profit for taxation, as explained herein above, on accrual basis in the appropriate assessment year during which the assessee held the security. This difference could have been treated by the department as interest on securities under section 18. However, in the instant case, the department has assessed the said difference under, section 28 under the head “Business” and not under the head “interest on securities”. Having treated the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 17 of 45difference under the head “Business”, the A.O. disallowed the broken period interest payment, which gave rise to the dispute. It was open to the department to assess the above difference under the head “interest on securities” under section 18. However, they chose to assess the interest under the head “business” and, while doing so, the department taxed broken period interest received, but disallowed broken period interest payment. It is in this light that one has to read the judgment of the Karnataka High Court and the Supreme Court in Vijaya Bank's case. In that case, the facts were as follows. During the Assessment Year under consideration, Vijaya Bank entered into an agreement with Jayalakshmi Bank Limited, whereby Vijaya Bank took over the liabilities of Jayalakshmi Bank. They also took over assets belonging to Jayalakshmi Bank. These assets consisted of two items viz. Rs. 58,568.00 and Rs. 11,630.00. The said amount of Rs. 58,568.00 represented interest, which accrued on securities taken over by Vijaya Bank from Jayalakshmi Bank and Rs. 11,630.00 was the interest which accrued upto the date of purchase of securities by the assessee­Bank from the open market. These too amounts were brought to tax by the A.O. under section 18 of the Income­tax Act. The assessee Bank claimed that these amounts were deductible under sections 19 and 20. This was on the footing that the department had brought to tax, the aforestated two amounts as interest on securities under section 18. It is in the light of these facts that one has; to read the judgment in Vijaya Bank's case. In the light of the above facts, it was held that outlay on purchase of income bearing asset was in the nature of capital outlay and no part of the capital outlay can be set off as expenditure against income accruing from the asset in question. In our case, the amount which the assessee received has been brought to tax Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 18 of 45under the head “business” under section 28. The amount is not brought to tax under section 18 of the Income­tax Act. After bringing the amount to tax under the head “business”, the department taxed the broken period interest received on sale, but at the same time, disallowed broken period interest payment at the time of purchase and this led to the dispute. Having assessed the amount received by the assessee under section 28, the only limited dispute was whether the impugned adjustments in the method of accounting adopted by the assessee Bank should be discarded. Therefore, the judgment in Vijaya Bank's case has no application to the facts of the present case. If the department had brought to tax, the amounts received by the assessee Bank under section 18, then Vijaya Bank's case was applicable. But,in the present case, the department brought to tax such amounts under section 28 right from the inception. Therefore, the Tribunal was right in coming to the conclusion that the judgment in Vijaya Bank's case did not apply to the facts of the present case. However, before us, it was argued on behalf of the revenue that in view of the judgment in Vijaya Bank's case, even if the securities were treated as part of the trading assets, the income therefrom had to be assessed under section 18 of the Act and not under section 28 of the Act as income from securities can only come within section 18 and not under section 28. We do not find any merit in this argument. Firstly, as stated above, Vijaya Bank's case has no application to the facts of this case. Secondly, in the present case, the Tribunal has found that the securities were held as trading assets. Thirdly, it has been held by the Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 19 of 45subsequent decision reported in 57 I.T.R. Page 306, in the case of C.I.T.

--- JUDGMENT 109 ---
Andhra Pradesh v. Cocanada Radhaswami Bank Limited, that income from securities can also come under section 28 as income from business. This judgment is very important. It analyzes the judgment of the Supreme Court in UCO Bank's case reported in 53 I.T.R. page 250, which has been followed by the Supreme Court in Vijaya Bank's case. It is true that once an income falls under section 18, it cannot come under section 28. However, as laid down by the Supreme Court in Cocanada Radhaswami Bank's case (supra), income from securities treated as trading assets can come under section 28. In the present case, the department has treated income from securities under section 28. Lastly, the facts in the case of UCO Bank reported in 53 I.T.R. page 250, also support our view in the present case. In UCO Bank's case, the assessee Bank claimed a set off under section 24(2) of the Income­tax Act, 1922 (section 71(1) of the present Act) against its income from interest on securities under section 8 of the 1922 Act (similar to section 28 of the present Act). It was held that UCO Bank was not entitled to such a set off as the income from interest on securities came under section 8 of the 1922 Act. Therefore, even in UCO Bank's case, the department had assessed income from interest on securities right from the inception under section 8 of the 1922 Act and, therefore, the set­off was not allowed under, section 24(2) of the Act. Therefore, UCO Bank's case has also no application to the facts of the present case in which the assessee's income from interest Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 20 of 45on securities is assessed under section 28 right from inception, in fact, in UCO Bank's case, the matter was remitted back as it was contended on behalf of UCO Bank that the securities in question were a part of trading assets held by the assessee in the course of its business and the income by way of interest on such securities was assessable under section 10 of the Income­tax Act, 1922 (similar to section 28 of the present Act). It is for this reason that in the subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Radhaswami Bank Limited (supra), that the Supreme Court has observed, after reading UCO Bank's case, that where securities were part of trading assets, income by way of interest on such securities could come under section 10 of the Income tax Act 1922. 20. In the light of what we have discussed hereinabove, we find that the assessee's method of accounting does not result in loss of tax/revenue for the department. That, there was no need to interfere with the method of accounting adopted by the assessee­Bank. That, the judgment in the case of Vijaya Bank had no application to the facts of the case. That, having assessed the income under section 28, the department ought to have taxed interest for broken period interest received and the department ought to have allowed deduction for broken period interest paid.” (emphasis added) 13. In the case of Citi Bank NA3, the question before this Court was whether interest paid for the broken period should not be considered part of the purchase price and whether it should be allowed as revenue expenditure in the year of Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 21 of 45purchase of securities. In this decision, this Court quoted the above paragraphs from the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2. This Court expressly approved the conclusions recorded by the Bombay High Court. This Court held thus: “The facts in the present case are similar to the facts in American Express (supra). Agreeing with this view and accepting the distinction pointed out by the Bombay High Court, this Court dismissed the two special leave petitions filed by the revenue, one of which was dismissed by a three Judge Bench. After going through the facts which are similar to the facts in American Express (supra), since the tax effect is neutral, the method of computation adopted by the assessee and accepted by the revenue cannot be interfered with. We agree with the view expressed by the Bombay High Court in American Express (supra) that on the facts of the present case, the judgment in Vijaya Bank Ltd. (supra) would have no application.” Thus, this Court approved the view taken by the Bombay High Court that the interest paid for the broken period should not be considered as part of the purchase price, but it should be allowed as revenue expenditure in the year of purchase of securities. This Court has reiterated the view taken by the Bombay High Court in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2. Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 22 of 45WHETHER SECURITIES ARE HELD AS STOCK­IN­TRADE 14. In the case of Cocanada Radhaswami Bank Ltd.4, the Bank had shown interest on securities held by it as a source of income. The Bank claimed loss against other banking activities and set off the interest on securities against the higher amount shown as loss in other banking activities. The department allowed the loss to be set off against the income under the head “business” and disallowed it under the income under the head “interest on securities”. The Appellate Tribunal confirmed the view.

--- JUDGMENT 110 ---
3 to 7, held thus: “3. Learned counsel for the Revenue argued that the income from business and securities fell under different heads, namely, Section 10 and Section 8 of the Act respectively, that they were mutually exclusive and, therefore, the losses under the head “business” could not be carried forward from the preceding year to the succeeding year and set off under Section 22(4) of the Act against the income from securities held by the assessee. 4. Learned counsel for the assessee, on the other hand, contended that though for the purpose of computation of income, the income from securities and the income from business were calculated separately, in a case where the securities were part of the trading assets of the business, the income therefrom was part of the income of the business and, therefore, the losses incurred under the head “business” could be set off during the succeeding years against the total income of Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 23 of 45the business i.e. income from the business including the income from the securities. 5. The relevant section of the Act which deals with the matter of set off of losses in computing the aggregate income is Section 24. The relevant part of it, before the Finance Act, 1955, read: “(1) Where any assessee sustains a loss of profits or gains in any year under any of the heads mentioned in Section 6, he shall be entitled to have the amount of the loss set off against his income, profits or gains under any other head in that year: *** (2) Where any assessee sustains a loss of profits or gains in any year, being a previous year not earlier than the previous year for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1940, in any business, profession or vocation, and the loss cannot be wholly set off under sub­section (1), so much of the loss as is not so set off or the whole loss where the assessee had no other head of income shall be carried forward to the following year and set off against the profits and gains, if any, of the assessee from the same business, profession or vocation, for that year; and if it cannot be wholly set off, the amount of loss not so set off shall be carried forward to the following year….” While sub­section (1) of Section 24 provides for setting off of the loss in a particular year under one of the heads mentioned in Section 6 against the profit under a different head in the same year, sub­section (2) provides for the carrying Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 24 of 45forward of the loss of one year and setting off of the same against the profit or gains of the assessee from the same business in the subsequent year or years The crucial words, therefore, are “profits and gains of the assessee from the same business” i.e. the business in regard to which he sustained loss in the previous year. The question, therefore, is whether the securities formed part of the trading assets of the business and the income therefrom was income from the business. The answer to this question depends upon the scope of Section 6 of the Act. Section 6 of the Act classified taxable income under the following several heads : (i) salaries; (ii) interest on securities; (iii) income from property; (iv) profits and gains of business, profession or vocation; (v) income from other sources; and (vi) capital gains. The scheme of the Act is that income tax is one tax. Section 6 only classifies the taxable income under different heads for the purpose of computation of the net income of the assessee. Though for the purpose of computation of the income, interest on securities is separately classified, income by way of interest from securities does not cease to be part of the income from business if the securities are part of the trading assets. Whether a particular income is part of the income from a business falls to be decided not on the basis of the provisions of Section 6 but on commercial principles. To put it in other words, did the securities in the present case which yielded the income form part of the trading assets of the assessee? The Tribunal and the High Court found that they were the assessee's trading assets and the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 25 of 45income therefrom was, therefore, the income of the business. If it was the income of the business, Section 24(2) of the Act was immediately attracted. If the income from the securities was the income from its business, the loss could, in terms of that section, be set off against that income. 6. A comparative study of sub­sections (1) and (2) of Section 24 yields the same result. While in sub­section (1) the expression “head” is used, in sub­section (2) the said expression is conspicuously omitted. This designed distinction brings out the intention of the legislature. The Act provides for the setting off of loss against profits in four ways. To illustrate, take the head “profits and gains of business, profession or vocation”. An assessee may have two businesses. In ascertaining the income in each of the two businesses, he is entitled to deduct the losses incurred in respect of each of the said businesses. So calculated, if he has loss in one business and profit in the other both falling under the same head, he can set off the loss in one against the profit in the other in arriving at the income under that head. Even so, he may still sustain loss under the same head. He can then set off the loss under the head “business” against profits under another head, say “income from investments”, even if investments are not part of the trading assets of the business. Notwithstanding this process he may still incur loss in his business. Section 24(2) says that in that event he can carry forward the loss to the subsequent year or years and set off the said loss against the profit in the business. Be it noted that clause (2) of Section 24, in contradistinction to clause (1) thereof, is concerned only with the business and not with its heads under Section 6 of the Act. Section 24, Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 26 of 45therefore, is enacted to give further relief to an assessee carrying on a business and incurring loss in the business though the income therefrom falls under different heads under Section 6 of the Act. 7.

--- JUDGMENT 111 ---
v. CIT [(1958) SCR 79] does not lay down any different proposition. It held, after an exhaustive review of the authorities, that under the scheme of the Income Tax Act, 1922, the head of income, profits and gains enumerated in the different clauses of Section 6 were mutually exclusive, Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 27 of 45each specific head covering items of income arising from a particular source. On that reasoning this Court held that even though the securities were part of the trading assets of the company doing business, the income therefrom had to be assessed under Section 8 of the Act. This decision does not say that the income from securities is not income from the business. Nor does the decision of this Court in East India Housing and Land Development Trust Ltd. v. CIT [(1961) 42 ITR 49] support the contention of the Revenue. There, a company, which was incorporated with the objects of buying and developing landed properties and promoting and developing markets, purchased 10 bighas of land in the town of Calcutta and set up a market therein. The question was whether the income realised from the tenants of the shops and stalls was liable to be taxed as “business income” under Section 10 of the Income Tax Act or as income from property under Section 9 thereof. This Court held that the said income fell under the specific head mentioned in Section 9 of the Act. This case also does not lay down that the income from the shops is not the income in the business. In CIT v. Express Newspapers Ltd [(1964) 53 ITR 250, 260] this Court held that both Section 26(2) and the proviso thereto dealt only with profits and gains of a business, profession, or vocation and they did not provide for the assessment of income under any other head e.g. capital gains. The reason for that conclusion is stated thus: “It (the deeming clause in Section 12­B) only introduces a limited fiction, namely, that capital gains accrued will be deemed to be income of the previous year in which the sale was effected. The Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 28 of 45fiction does not make them the profits or gains of the business. It is well settled that a legal fiction is limited to the purpose for which it is created and should not be extended beyond its legitimate field … The profits and gains of business and capital gains are two distinct concepts in the Income Tax Act : the former arises from the activity which is called business and the latter accrues because capital assets are disposed of at a value higher than what they cost the assessee. They are placed under different heads; they are derived from different sources; and the income is computed under different methods. The fact that the capital gains are connected with the capital assets of the business cannot make them the profit of the business. They are only deemed to be income of the previous year and not the profits or gains arising from the business during that year.” It will be seen that the reason for the conclusion was that capital gains were not income from the business. Though some observations divorced from content may appear to be wide, the said decision was mainly based upon the character of the capital gains and not upon their non­ inclusion under the heading “business”. The limited scope of the earlier decision was explained by this Court in CIT v. Chugandas & Co. [(1965) 55 ITR 17, 24] . Therein this Court held that interest from securities formed part of the assessee's business income for the purpose of exemption under Section 25(3). Shah, J., speaking for the Court, observed: “The heads described in Section 6 and further elaborated for the purpose of Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 29 of 45computation of income in Sections 7 to 10 and 12, 12­A, 12­AA and 12­B are intended merely to indicate the classes of income : the heads do not exhaustively delimit sources from which income arises. This is made clear in the judgment of this Court in the United Commercial Bank Ltd. case [(1958) SCR 79] , that business income is broken up under different heads only for the purposes of computation of the total income : by that break up the income does not cease to be income of the business, the different heads of income being only the classification prescribed by the Indian Income Tax Act for computation of income.”” (emphasis added) The same principles apply to the cases in hand. 15. In the case of Bihar State Co­operative Bank Ltd.7, in paragraph 2 (SCC report), this Court set out the questions involved which read thus: “2. In its return the appellant showed these various sums as “other sources”, but nothing turns on the manner in which the appellant chose to show this income in its return. The Income Tax Officer, however, assessed the interest for these three years under Section 12 of the Income Tax Act, as income from “other sources”. The appellant took an appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner where it was contended that as the business of the appellant Bank consisted of lending money and the deposits had been made not for the purpose of investment but for that business and thereby Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 30 of 45fulfilling the purpose for which the cooperative Bank was constituted, these various sums of interest were not subject to income tax because of the notification issued by the Central Government under Section 60 of the Income Tax Act. The relevant portion of that notification, CBR Notification 35 dated 20­10­1934, and No. 33 dated 18­8­1945, was: “The following classes of income shall be exempt from the tax payable under the said Act, but shall be taken into account in determining the total income of an assessee for the purpose of the said Act: *** (2) The profits of any cooperative society other than the Sanikatta Salt Owners' Society in the Bombay Presidency for the time being registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912 (Act 2 of 1912), the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act, 1925 (Bombay Act 7 of 1925), or the Madras Cooperative Societies Act, 1932 (Madras Act 6 of 1932), or the dividends or other payments received by the members of any such society out of such profits. Explanation : For this purpose the profits of a cooperative society shall not be deemed to include any income, profits or gains from: (1) Investments in (a) securities of the nature referred to in Section 8 of the Indian Income Tax Act; or (b) property of the nature referred to in Section 9 of that Act; (2) dividends, or Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 31 of 45(3) the ‘other sources’ referred to in Section 12 of the Indian Income Tax Act.” The Appellate Assistant Commissioner, however, repelled the contention of the appellant. He held that the business of the appellant consisted of ‘lending money, and selling agricultural and other products to its constituents’ which could be planned ahead and required no provision for claims He remarked that it appeared from the balance sheets that in the Accounting Year 1945 the Bank invested Rs 13,50,000 as fixed deposits, which, in the following year was raised to Rs 15,00,000 and it was only in the Accounting Year 1947 that the fixed deposits, “were realised on maturity with interest”. He was also of the opinion that the length of the period during which this money “was kept locked in this way” showed clearly that “not the exigencies of pressing necessities, but the motives of investment of surplus fund had actuated the deposits”. He therefore held that the fixed deposits with Imperial Bank were held as an investment quite apart from the business of the appellant and the interest from these deposits was not exempt from income tax. He further held that the exemption as to the profit of a cooperative society extended to its sphere of cooperative activities and therefore interest from investments was no part of the appellant's business profits exempt from taxation. Against this order an appeal was taken to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and it was there contended that the Bank did not make the deposits as investments, but in order that cash might be available to the appellant “continuously” for the carrying on of the purposes of its business, and that the deposits were intimately connected with the business of Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 32 of 45the appellant and therefore the interest should have been held to be profits arising from the business activities of the Bank, and that the finding that the short­term deposits in Imperial Bank were separate from the appellant's Banking business was erroneous. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, by its order dated 11­4­ 1955, held: “(1) That the interest was an income rightly to be included under the head of ‘other sources’. *** (2) The profits of a cooperative society indicates the profit derived from the business which can be truly called the business of the cooperative society. Investments by the society either in securities or in shares or in Bank fixed deposits are made out of surplus funds. The interest or dividend derived from such investment cannot be regarded as part of the profits of the business (sic) qua such Bank and therefore, it is not exempt from income tax (vide Hoshiarpur Central Cooperative Bank v. CIT [24 ITR 346, 3501], 24 I.T.R. 346, 350).” Against this order a case was stated at the instance of the appellant under Section 66(1) of the Act, and the following two questions of law were referred for the opinion of the High Court: (1) Whether, in the facts and circumstances of this case, the receipt of interest on fixed deposits was an income under the head of “other sources”: and Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 33 of 45(2) Whether in the facts and circumstances of this case, the receipt of interest from the fixed deposits was an income not exempt from taxation under the CBR Notification No. 35 dated 20­10­1934 and No.

--- JUDGMENT 112 ---
33 dated 18­8­1945.” In paragraphs 9 and 10, this Court proceeded to hold thus: “9. In the instant case the cooperative society (the appellant) is a Bank. One of its objects is to carry on the general business of Banking. Like other Banks money is its stock­in­trade or circulating capital and its normal business is to deal in money and credit. It cannot be said that the business of such a Bank consists only in receiving deposits and lending money to its members or such other societies as are mentioned in the objects and that when it lays out its moneys so that they may be readily available to meet the demand of its depositors if and when they arise, it is not a legitimate mode of carrying on of its Banking business. The Privy Council in Punjab Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. CIT Lahore [24 ITR 346, 350] where the profits arose from the sale of government securities pointed out at p. 645 that in the ordinary cases the business of a Bank essentially consists of dealing with money and credit. Depositors put their money in the Bank at a small rate of interest and in order to meet their demands if and when they arise the Bank has always to keep sufficient cash or easily realisable securities. That is a normal step in the carrying on of the Banking business. In other words that is an act done in what is truly the carrying on or carrying out of a business. It may be added that another mode of conducting business of a Bank is to place its funds in Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 34 of 45deposit with other Banks and that also is to meet demands which may be made on it. It was however argued that in the instant case the moneys had been deposited with Imperial Bank on long term deposits inasmuch as they were deposited for one year and were renewed from time to time also for a year; but as is shown by the accounts these deposits fell due at short intervals and would have been available to the appellant had any need arisen. 10. Stress was laid on the use of the word “surplus” both by the Tribunal as well as by the High Court and it was also contended before us that in the bye­laws under the heading “business of the Bank” it was provided that the Bank could “invest surplus funds when not required for the business of the Bank in one or more ways specified in Section 19 of the Bihar Act (Clause 4 III(i) of the bye­Laws). Whether funds invested as provided in Section 19 of the Bihar Act would be surplus or not does not arise for decision in this case, but it has not been shown that the moneys which were in deposit with other Banks were “surplus” within that bye­law so as to take it out of Banking business. As we have pointed out above, it is a normal mode of carrying on Banking business to invest moneys in a manner that they are readily available and that is just as much a part of the mode of conducting a Bank's business as receiving deposits or lending moneys or discounting hundies or issuing demand drafts. That is how the circulating capital is employed and that is the normal course of business of a Bank. The moneys laid out in the form of deposits as in the instant case would not cease to be a part of the circulating capital of the appellant nor would they cease to form part of its Banking business. The returns flowing from Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 35 of 45them would form part of its profits from its business. In a commercial sense the directors of the Company owe it to the Bank to make investments which earn them interest instead of letting moneys lie idle. It cannot be said that the funds of the Bank which were not lent to borrowers but were laid out in the form of deposits in another Bank to add to the profit instead of lying idle necessarily ceased to be a part of the stock­in­trade of the Bank, or that the interest arising therefrom did not form part of its business profits. Under the bye­laws one of the objects of the appellant Bank is to carry on the general business of Banking and therefore subject to the Cooperative Societies Act, it has to carry on its business in the manner that ordinary Banks do. It may be added that the various heads under Section 6 of the Income Tax Act and the provisions of that Act applicable to these various heads are mutually exclusive. Section 12 is a residuary section and does not come into operation until the preceding heads are excluded. CIT v.

--- JUDGMENT 113 ---
159.]. “that enhanced values obtained from realization or conversion of securities may be so assessable where what is done is not merely a realization or change of investment, but an act done in what is truly the carrying on, or carrying out, of a business”. In the ordinary case of a Bank, the business consists in its essence of dealing with money and credit. Numerous depositors place their money with the Bank often receiving a small rate of interest on it. A number of borrowers receive loans of a large part of these deposited funds at somewhat higher rates of interest. But the Banker has always to keep enough cash or easily realisable securities to meet any probable demand by the depositors. No doubt there will generally be loans to persons of undoubted solvency which can quickly be called in, but it may be very undesirable to use this second line of defence. If as in the present case some of the securities of the Bank are realised in order to meet withdrawals by depositors, it seems to their Lordships to be quite clear that this is a Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 37 of 45normal step in carrying on the Banking business, or, in other words, that it is an act done in “what is truly the carrying on” of the Banking business. This, it appears to their Lordships, is the more appropriate and satisfactory ground for dealing with the question arising in the present case.” (emphasis added) 17. Therefore, the Privy Council and this Court have consistently held that the securities that Banks acquire as a part of the banking business are held as stock­in­trade and not as an investment. OUR CONCLUSIONS 18. Initially, CBDT issued Circular No. 599 of 1991 and observed that the securities held by Banks must be recorded as their stock­in­trade. The circular was withdrawn in view of the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. In the year 1998, RBI issued a circular dated 21st April 1998, stating that the Bank should not capitalise broken period interest paid to the seller as a part of cost but treat it as an item of expenditure under the profit and loss account. A similar circular was issued on 21st April 2001, stating that the Bank should not capitalise the broken period interest paid to the seller as a cost but treated it as an item of expenditure under the profit and loss account. In 2007, the CBDT issued Circular No. 4 of 2007, observing that a taxpayer can have two portfolios. The first can be an investment portfolio Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 38 of 45comprising securities, which are to be treated as capital assets, and the other can be a trading portfolio comprising stock­in­trade, which are to be treated as trading assets. 19. As stated earlier, Banks are required to purchase Government securities to maintain the SLR. As per RBI’s guideline dated 16th October 2000, there are three categories of securities: HTM, AFS and HFT. As far as AFS and HFT are concerned, there is no difficulty. When these two categories of securities are purchased, obviously, the same are not investments but are always held by Banks as stock­in­trade. Therefore, the interest accrued on the said two categories of securities will have to be treated as income from the business of the Bank. Thus, after the deduction of broken period interest is allowed, the entire interest earned or accrued during the particular year is put to tax. Thus, what is taxed is the real income earned on the securities. By selling the securities, Banks will earn profits. Even that will be the income considered under Section 28 after deducting the purchase price. Therefore, in these two categories of securities, the benefit of deduction of interest for the broken period will be available to Banks. 20. If deduction on account of broken period interest is not allowed, the broken period interest as capital expense will have to be added to the acquisition cost of the securities, which will then be deducted from the sale proceeds when such securities are sold in the subsequent years. Therefore, Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 39 of 45the profit earned from the sale would be reduced by the amount of broken period interest. Therefore, the exercise sought to be done by the Department is academic.

--- JUDGMENT 114 ---
At this stage, we may refer to a decision of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax (Central), Calcutta v. Associated Industrial Development Company (P) Ltd., Calcutta10. In the said decision, this Court held that whether a particular holding of shares is by way of investments or forms part of the stock­in­trade is a matter which is within the knowledge of the assessee. Therefore, on facts, if it is found that HMT Security is held as an investment, the benefit of broken period interest will not be available. The position will be otherwise if it is held as a trading asset. 10 (1972) 4 SCC 447 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 40 of 4523. Now, we turn to the factual aspects. As far as Civil Appeal No. 3291­94 of 2009 is concerned, the Tribunal, in a detailed judgment, recorded the following conclusions: a. Interest income on securities right from assessment year 1989­90 is being treated as interest on securities and is taxed under Section 28 of the IT Act; b. Since the beginning, securities are treated as stock­in­ trade which has been upheld by the Department right from the assessment year 1982­83 onwards; c. Securities were held by the respondent Bank as stock­ in­trade. The findings of the Tribunal have been upset by the High Court. The impugned judgment proceeds on the footing that the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 case would still apply. Thus, as far as Civil Appeal Nos. 3291­3294 of 2009 are concerned, as a finding of fact, it was found that the appellant Bank was treating the securities as stock­in­trade. The said view was upset by the High Court only on the ground of the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. As the securities were held as stock­in­trade, the income thereof was chargeable under Section 28 of the IT Act. Even the assessing officer observed that considering the repeal of Sections 18 to 21, the interest on securities would be charged as per Section 28 as the securities were held in the normal course of his business. The assessing officer Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 41 of 45observed that the appellant­Bank, in its books of accounts and annual report, offered taxation on the basis of actual interest received and not on a due basis. 24. Therefore, in the facts of the case, as the securities were treated as stock­in­trade, the interest on the broken period cannot be considered as capital expenditure and will have to be treated as revenue expenditure, which can be allowed as a deduction. The impugned judgment is based on the decision in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd.1 It also refers to the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of American Express International Banking Corporation2 and holds that the same was not correct. As noted earlier, the view taken in the American Express International Banking Corporation2 case has been expressly upheld by this Court in the case of Citi Bank NA3. Therefore, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained, and the view taken by the Tribunal will have to be restored. 25.

--- JUDGMENT 115 ---
Now, we come to other appeals which are part of this group. In Civil Appeal @Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.1445­ 1446 of 2021, the assessing officer held that the respondent Bank was liable to pay the broken period of interest as part of the price paid for the securities. Hence, a deduction on the said amount was disallowed. The assessee could not succeed before the CIT (Appeals). Before the Appellate Tribunal, reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Vijaya Bank Ltd1. The Tribunal observed that the Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 42 of 45assessing officer had treated the interest income earned by the respondent Bank on securities as income from other sources. The Tribunal observed that the investments in securities are in stock­in­trade, and this fact has been accepted in the past by the Income Tax department. It was held that the securities in the category of HTM were also held as stock­in­trade, and income/loss arising out of such securities, including HTM securities, has been treated as business income/loss. The Appellate Tribunal held that the interest for the broken period would be admissible as a deduction, and the High Court confirmed the same. We may note here that the Tribunal followed the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of HDFC Bank Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 116 ---
26. In Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No.4843 of 2020, the High Court held in favour of the respondent­Bank by allowing a deduction for broken period interest relying upon the decision in the case of HDFC Bank Ltd11. In this case, the assessing officer did not accept the claim of the Bank that the securities held were in the nature of stock­in­ trade. However, the CIT (Appeals) and the Appellate Tribunal accepted the respondent Bank’s case. In this case, before the Appellate Tribunal, the department conceded in favour of the assessee. 11 (2014) 366 ITR 505 Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 43 of 4527. In Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 7055 of 2021, neither the assessment officer nor the CIT allowed a deduction on account of the broken period interest. However, the Tribunal allowed the same. Before the High Court, Revenue argued that the increase in capital results in the expansion of the Bank's capital base, which helps in profit making. Therefore, the expenditure in the nature of broken period interest was capital expenditure. However, The High Court rightly rejected the contention of the department that the outlay on the purchase of securities was capital outlay. 28. In Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No.7404 of 2021, the CIT, the High Court took a similar view. The same is the case with Civil Appeals @ Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.15281 and 1686 of 2021. 29. In Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No.1687 of 2021 and Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No.8968 of 2018, the High Court allowed interest deduction on broken period. In Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition (C) No.24841 of 2019, though the assessment officer held that the broken period interest has to be capitalised, the Appellate Tribunal upset the said view. In Civil Appeal No.4755 of 2023, deduction for broken period interest has been allowed. 30. Hence, in Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, the judgment of the High Court cannot be sustained, and the decisions of the Tribunal dated 29th May 2003 and 15th July 2004 will have to be restored. All other appeals preferred by Civil Appeal No.3291­3294 of 2009, etc. Page 44 of 45the Revenue will have to be dismissed subject to clarification regarding securities of the HTM category. 31.

--- JUDGMENT 117 ---
3. Located between the Union Territory of Chandigarh and the Shivalik Range, the lands are bordered on one side by the Sukhna Lake, and a designated Forest Area on the other. It is also adjacent to several other residential sectors that the Appellant has fully developed as part of the Mansa Devi Complex in the Panchkula Urban Area. 4. The Respondents submitted their objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act on 16.04.1999, contending that their portion of the land under acquisition ought to be exempted as they contained fruit trees and the state policy mandates the exemption of such lands from acquisition. Additionally, they claimed that a cattle- shed, greenhouse, and an attendant room were also erected on the land, for which authorization had been granted by the 2Commissioner, Ambala, on 23.12.1992 under the Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952 (hereinafter, ‘Punjab Periphery Act’). Similarly, a farmhouse was also claimed to have been constructed with the approval of the Additional District Judge, Ambala, (hereinafter, ‘ADJ’) vide judgement dated 05.04.1994. 5. The Collector accepted these objections, noting that since the Commissioner and the ADJ had authorized the construction on the land, it could be exempted from acquisition. However, the State Government went ahead with the acquisition, asserting that the structures were unauthorized. A declaration under Section 6 of the 1894 Act was issued on 16.03.2000 to acquire both the land and the constructions thereon. 6. Aggrieved, the Respondents approached the High Court, pleading that their objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act had not been appropriately considered. 7. Subsequently, vide the impugned judgement dated 15.07.2008, the High Court allowed the Respondents’ writ petition and quashed the notifications issued under Sections 4 and 6 of the 1894 Act. This finding stood on two primary legs: (i) the 3Respondents’ objections were wrongfully rejected as the constructions were duly authorized; and (ii) it was discriminatory to acquire the Respondents’ land when similarly situated land belonging to Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh had been exempted from acquisition. 8. Discontented with the quashing of the notifications issued under Sections 4 and 6 of the 1894 Act, the Appellant—beneficiary of the acquisition, is before us in these appeals. This Court, vide order dated 01.09.2008, directed the parties to maintain status quo which is operating till date. B.

--- JUDGMENT 118 ---
Mr. Lokesh Sinhal, Learned Senior Additional Advocate General of Haryana, appearing on behalf of the Appellant— beneficiary of the acquisition contended that the High Court erred in quashing the aforementioned notifications. In support of this assertion, he made the following submissions: (a) The constructions undertaken by the Respondents were unauthorized. Although permission was granted by the Commissioner, Ambala, it was conditioned on the Respondents submitting the building plan. However, there is 4no evidence substantiating that such a plan was ever submitted. Hence it cannot be presumed that the construction was duly authorized, and consequently, the Competent Authority was justified in repudiating the Appellant’s objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act. (b) The Collector did not recommend the release of the Respondents’ land. He merely stated that the State Government may consider such release. The issue of exemption from acquisition was consequently left open for consideration by the Competent Authority. (c) Even if it is assumed that the Collector recommended the release of the land, it would not bind the State Government. After due inspection, the High-Powered Committee had determined that the construction was unauthorized and not in conformity with the Developmental Plan. The State Government, therefore, committed no error on disagreeing with the Collector and proceeding with the acquisition, as buttressed by this Court’s decision in Anand Buttons Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 119 ---
Bharat Bhushan Parsoon, and Mr. Sanjeev Sharma, Learned Senior Counsels representing the Respondents, have supported the impugned judgement by arguing that: (a) The burden of proving that the constructions were not supported by the building plan lies on the Appellant. Since the same has not been proved, there cannot be any adverse presumption against the legality of the construction. In any case, as confirmed by the order dated 05.04.1994 of the ADJ, 6the Appellant was not obligated to seek any permission and hence, non-submission of the building plan is not material. (b) There is a flagrant violation of Section 5A as the Respondents’ objections have not been considered in accordance with law. Since Section 5A of the 1894 Act provides a valuable safeguard to an expropriated land owner, it warrants mandatory compliance and cannot be treated as an empty formality. (c) Furthermore, doubt can be cast on the thoroughness of the inspection conducted by the High-Powered Committee constituted by the State Government, given that a vast tract of land is claimed to have been inspected in a very short duration. Additionally, the composition of the committee formed for the inspection indicates a complete abdication of power by the State government. (d) Even if the land of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh was re-acquired, it was done at a rate prevalent in 2007, which was higher in comparison to 1999. Denying the higher rate to the Respondents amounts to arbitrary and discriminatory conduct. 7(e) In any case, there is a significant subsequent development, as during the pendency of the proceedings, the State of Haryana has agreed on releasing the subject land, provided that the Respondents provide a part of the land for basic amenities free of cost and use the remaining for charitable purposes. Since the Respondents have consented to put their land to such conditional use, this Court should give effect to such a conscionable agreement between the parties and may, therefore, dismiss the instant appeals in light thereof. (f) Since this Court has dismissed the previous appeals filed by the State of Haryana against the same impugned order, the present set of appeals are not maintainable and attract the auspices of the doctrine of merger. C.

--- JUDGMENT 120 ---
ISSUES 11. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions at length, we find that the following four issues are to be analysed: i. Whether the mandatory procedure contemplated under Section 5A of the 1894 Act has been complied with? 8ii. Whether the land acquisition proceedings deserve to be vitiated on the ground that similarly placed landowners have been treated differently? iii. Whether the instant appeals are liable to be dismissed as infructuous in view of the subsequent developments like `settlement’ between the parties? iv. Whether doctrine of merger is attracted in view of the fact that State appeals against the same impugned judgment have already been dismissed? D. ANALYSIS D.1 Evaluation of objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act 12. The focal contention of the Respondent-landowners is that the acquisition proceedings stand vitiated and ought to be quashed as they were carried out in violation of Section 5A of the 1894 Act, which mandates due consideration of their objections. 13. It would be pertinent to understand the object that Section 5A of the 1894 Act seeks to fulfil. A plain reading of the provision indicates that it codifies the fundamental safeguard of audi altrem partem. Landowners have the opportunity to demonstrate that the 9acquisition is against public purpose or marred by mala fides. In the event the landowner presents a cogent case, the appropriate government may exempt such land from acquisition. By enabling landowners to put forward their perspective and elucidate their remonstrances, Section 5A envisions a modus of deliberation and consultation, which must therefore be construed to be mandatory, akin to a right.2 14. Objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act most often proceed in four distinct stages: i. The filing stage: Landowners can file objections within thirty days of the notification issued under Section 4 of the 1894 Act;3 ii. The hearing stage: The Collector must provide an oral hearing to the objecting landowners, either in person or through a pleader/authorized representative;4 iii. The recommendation stage: The Collector—after hearing objections and upon further inquiry—makes a report to the 2 Women's Education Trust v. State of Haryana, (2013) 8 SCC 99, para 1.

--- JUDGMENT 121 ---
3 Section 5A (1), 1894 Act. 4 NOIDA v. Darshan Lal Bora, 2024 INS 508. 10appropriate government containing their recommendations; and iv. The decision stage: The appropriate government considers the Collector’s report and takes a final decision on the objections. 15. Reverting to the case in hand, although the Respondents have averred that their right under Section 5A has been infringed, however, they have failed to substantiate such claim. Onus was on the Respondents to identify any fault in the procedure adopted by the State, which we find tracks closely with the aforementioned four-stage process. When the Section 4 notification was issued on 16.03.1999, objections were invited from the landowners. These objections were duly heard, and a report was prepared by the Collector. Subsequently, the State Government constituted a High- Powered Committee, and based on its findings and opinion, the Government ultimately took a final decision to acquire the Respondents’ land. Section 5A mandates a procedure, not a particular outcome. The landowners in this case were thus certainly guaranteed a hearing and consideration, not relief. 16. Regarding the fourth stage, the Respondents have specifically argued that since the Collector had recommended the release of 11their land and the State Government deviated from such recommendation without any valid and sufficient reasons, its decision is bad in law. In effect, their claim seems to be that the Collector’s recommendation ought to be final and binding on the Government. However, such an interpretation is at odds with the bare text of Section 5A, which states that the Collector shall “either make a report in respect of the land which has been notified under Section 4, sub-section (1), or make different reports in respect of different parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government, containing his recommendations on the objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of that Government. The decision of the appropriate Government on the objections shall be final.” [Emphasis supplied] 17. The choice of different terminologies for the role of the Collector and the role of the Government makes it evident that the Legislature intended different roles for each of them. The Collector has no power to “decide” the case and can only give “recommendations” to the Government. It is the Government which is the ultimate arbiter for determining whether the land is to be released or not. No other authority can dictate the outcome 12of Section 5A proceedings—neither the Collector nor the landowner.5 While the Collector’s report can form the “basis” of such decision, the Government is free to independently evaluate and take a final decision, of course, based on relevant and lawful considerations. 18. It is therefore patently clear that the State Government possessed the ability to disagree with the Collector’s report and decide a different course. This is not to say that the Government’s decision cannot be challenged or is beyond judicial review. Indeed, had the Respondents demonstrated that the decision was arbitrary or passed without due application of mind, then they could have been victorious in their challenge. However, the Respondents have not placed any evidence on record to lay such foundation. On the contrary, the State Government/Appellant have demonstrated that their decision was not whimsical but was predicated on the findings of a High-Powered Committee, which comprised qualified individuals, like officers of the Indian Administrative Services, officials working with the Appellant, experts from the Town Planning Department and the Department of Agriculture, etc. Having duly inspected the subject land, this Committee deduced 5 Shri Mandir Sita Ramji v. Lt. Governor of Delhi, (1975) 4 SCC 298, para 5. 13that the building structures on the land were unauthorized and not in conformity with the Development Plan. Relying on this analysis, the Government deviated from the Collector’s recommendation and proceeded with the acquisition. We are of the considered view that such departure was made in public interest, with due application of mind and was fully justified. 19. The Respondents have also assailed that the State Government’s decision was at odds with the earlier orders of the Commissioner and the ADJ, who had authorized such constructions. We find this submission disingenuous. These orders of the Commissioner and ADJ permitted constructions that were to be erected specifically for agricultural purposes, not residential. The order dated 23.12.1992, specifically notes that only structures like cattle sheds and green houses would be permitted, as they are subservient to agricultural activities, whereas a modern farm house would be unauthorized under the Punjab Periphery Act. Similarly, the order dated 05.04.1994 noted that no such authorization would be necessary, provided the land was to be utilized for agricultural purposes. However, the submissions proffered by the Respondents undermine their own case. While attempting to attack the public purpose element of the 14acquisition proceedings, they admitted that the usage of the land was not limited to ‘agricultural purposes’ and that it was intended to be ‘residential’ in nature as well. This disharmony is visible in the Respondents’ Section 5A objections: “6. That the above said land of the objector is situated adjacent to sector 4 Mansa Devi Complex and the objector has purchased this costly land with a view to set up a farm house thereon, since the purpose of Acquisition is also residential, it would be against the principal of natural justice to uproot the objector first and then to develop the same land for residential purpose meaning thereby the State would be providing residential accommodation to one of after taking away the residential land from the objector, which would serve no public purpose as stated in the notice. Hence, the notice under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act is liable to be withdrawn qua the above said land of the objector.” [Emphasis supplied] 20. Given how the Respondents have themselves admitted to the intention of developing their lands and structures for non- agricultural activities, we do not wish to second guess the fact- finding exercise conducted by the High-Powered Committee. We must also note that the orders of the Commissioner and ADJ were caveated approvals for prospective construction of the agricultural structures. We do not see how these would preclude the State Government from conducting an actual on-ground inspection and 15coming to a different conclusion as to their actual use. It is indeed possible that following the said orders, the land may have had unauthorized structures, which were being used beyond mere agricultural purposes. This possibility is only further enhanced by the Respondents’ own stated intention of putting the lands to residential use. 21. Regardless, we may also hasten to add here that there are serious doubts on the jurisdictional competence of the Civil Court, in holding that agriculture related structures could be raised without prior permission. Such a hasty declaration by the ADJ was ex facie uncalled for and beyond its jurisdictional authority, given that it was expressly barred under the Punjab Periphery Act. 22. However, the Respondents’ strategy of arguing that their constructions were authorized (being agricultural), while simultaneously seeking exemption from acquisition on the ground that their lands were subserving the same intention as the acquisition (being residential), is not only contradictory but also ill-advised. Furthermore, in first placing themselves at par with the object of acquisition, and then vitiating that very purpose by claiming that it contravenes the Punjab Periphery Act, the Respondents have effectively shot themselves in the foot. 1623. The Respondents have also failed to discharge their burden of proof. They have not produced any reliable material to prove that the constructions on their land were authorized, and if anything, have further created doubts, as to whether these structures are indeed permitted under the auspices of the Punjab Periphery Act. 24. On the contrary, there is ample material on record to show that the High-Powered Committee comprised of senior officials, made their assessment after having properly inspected the site. This Committee emphatically recommended that the whole of the land, including the unauthorized structures, be acquired for the proposed regulated development. Such a decision, in our considered view, is in conformity with the legislative object behind the Haryana Development and Regulation of Urban Areas Act, 1975, whereunder no construction on an agricultural land is permissible save and except when the change of land use is granted by the appropriate authority, in accordance with the procedure prescribed therein. 25. In any case, even if the constructions were to be authorized, it would not materially affect our outcome. As has been held by this Court on several occasions, exempting lands bearing constructions from acquisition is a matter of State Policy, and not 17of law.6 In case the Government finds that exempting such lands would adversely affect the larger Development Plan or any other purpose behind the acquisition, then it can still continue with the acquisition.7 Private interest of a few, should give way to the public interest of the many. Prior authorization of the constructions is also not the definitive saving grace that the Respondents imagine it to be. In fact, this Court has repeatedly allowed acquisitions even in cases where the construction was specifically authorized by the government beforehand, as was the case in State of Haryana v. Vinod Oil & General Mills:8 “8. Acquisition of the respondents' lands was held to be vitiated on the ground that the State having granted permission to the respondents for change of land use and develop the area as an industry cannot turn around after twenty-six years to acquire the land saying that the same is required to be developed for residential purposes and the action of the respondent State was held to be arbitrary. Of course, the Director of Town and Country Planning, Haryana earlier granted permission to the respondents herein for change of land use for construction of Oil and General Mills in their lands in 23 kanals 6 marlas in Khasra Nos. 148/1, 148/2 and 149/10. The fact that the factory and building was put up in the land with the approval of the authority cannot be a bar for acquisition of the land. Public interest overrides individual 6 NOIDA v. Darshan Lal Bohra, 2024 SCC Online SC 1690. 7 Anand Buttons Ltd. v. State of Haryana, (2005) 9 SCC 164. 8 (2014) 15 SCC 410, para 8.

--- JUDGMENT 122 ---
18interests. In our view, the High Court was not justified in saying that the acquisition is bad since permission was earlier granted for change of land use and developing the area as an industry and that the Government is estopped from initiating acquisition proceeding” [Emphasis supplied] 26. The existence of constructions on the Respondents’ land, whether authorized or not, legal or not, cannot be by themselves an absolute embargo on the Government’s power of eminent domain. The challenge brought by the Respondents on the anvil of Section 5A of the 1894 Act, therefore, falls flat. D.2. Discrimination and Article 14 of our Constitution 27. In addition to seeking refuge under Section 5A of the 1894 Act, the Respondents contend that the acquisition of their land was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. They claim that the land of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh had been exempted from the acquisition. This contention was also accepted by the High Court, which held the subject-acquisition to be discriminatory in nature, for leaving out lands of similarly placed owners from the process of acquisition. 28. We find this patently erroneous, for three reasons. First, the High Court overlooked the fact that the total land proposed to be 19acquired through the Section 4 notification was 952.18 acres, out of which land admeasuring 950.14 acres eventually stood acquired. The acquisition of 99.78% of the initially notified land demonstrated the intention of the State to acquire the land uniformly, and not pick and choose individual parcels of land.

--- JUDGMENT 123 ---
Second, we disagree with the remedy, even if discrimination was to have been established. The solution to some lands being unjustifiably left out is to direct their acquisition, not encourage the exclusion of more lands. The latter approach only furthers the discrimination and creates more aggrieved landowners. Moreover, it is settled law that Article 14 cannot be ordinarily employed as a ground to claim negative equality, i.e., it cannot be used for claiming illicit benefits simply because someone else has been allowed such an undue favour, especially when doing so would 9 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd., 1964 SCC Online SC 121, para 11. 20jeopardize the entire acquisition by undermining its contiguity.10 Therefore, instead of multiplying the illegality, the High Court ought to have exercised its writ jurisdiction to annul such illicit benefit received by the similarly placed person.11 31. Third, and most crucially, the illegality, if any, has since been remedied. It could not be disputed before us that the land of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh had been subsequently acquired through notifications dated 16.05.2007 and 27.03.2008. The very basis of discrimination, thus, stood denuded of its factual foundation as of the date the High Court passed the impugned judgement on 15.07.2008. The High Court ought to have taken note of this material subsequent event which took place during the pendency of the proceedings before it, considering its serious impact on the outcome of the entire acquisition process. D.3. Events before this Court 32. We may now advert to certain unpalatable events which occurred during the pendency of these appeals before this Court. On 10.05.2023, when the matter was posted for hearing, a joint 10 Gurcharan Singh & Ors. v. New Delhi Municipal Committee & Ors., (1996) 2 SCC 459 11 Vivek Coop. House Building Society Ltd. v. State of Haryana, 2016 SCC OnLine P&H 15802; Chandigarh Administration v. Jagjit Singh, (1991) 1 SCC 745. 21request was made to list these matters for final hearing on 26.07.2023. On the date fixed, learned Senior Additional Advocate General of Haryana bona fidely conveyed the State’s consent to drop the acquisition process qua the Respondents’ land only, if they were to agree, to provide a part of the subject land for the building of roads and other public amenities free of cost, along with an undertaking that the remaining land shall be utilized only for charitable purposes, i.e., non-commercial activities. Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondents was consequently directed to seek formal instructions in this regard. Respondents meanwhile filed a formal undertaking stating that they would use the land only for non-profit and charitable purposes. 33. On 13.09.2023, we directed the State Government / Appellant to file an affidavit responding to the following queries: (a) Why the State Government is agreeable to release the land of the Respondents from acquisition? (b) Whether such release of land will affect the acquisition of adjoining lands or not? (c) Whether the subject-land falls within or near the Sukhna Lake catchment area? 22(d) Whether the land in dispute falls in any non-construction zone? (e) If not, what type of construction is permissible in and around the area of subject-land? 34. In response thereto, the State of Haryana filed an affidavit stating, inter alia, as follows: (a) The land can be released because the acquisition proceedings for the same were quashed by the High Court and are under abeyance in view of the status quo order passed by this Court and because the Respondents undertake to utilize the land for charitable purposes; (b) The present case has unique circumstances; (c) The site does not fall within the Sukhna Catchment Area, however, the exact area that falls under Eco Sensitive Zone would be known once the notification for such zone is finalized; and (d) Construction is permissible in the land. 35. The Respondents also, without any delay, filed their affidavits in consonance and agreement with the State Government’s 23affidavit. Since the parties have reached a ‘settlement’ during the pendency of these appeals, we are introspecting as to whether or not to allow the Government to make such exemption for the Respondents’ land. 36. We are not oblivious to ground realities. This Court is aware that the subject land is prime real estate. The proposed acquisition and development is located between the Shivalik Range and the Union Territory of Chandigarh. One side touches the Sukhna lake, while the other side abuts a notified forest. The land is contiguous with well-developed residential areas like the Mansa Devi Complex. Its idyllic natural surroundings and strategic proximity to urban areas and limited supply of similarly placed alternative areas, makes the land priceless. 37. Furthermore, we are also aware of the fact that the acquisition, in its entirety, was under challenge before the High Court, with a batch of writ petitions pending at the stage of final hearing, at the time when the State Government agreed to release the subject land. The High Court has meanwhile dismissed those petitions, upholding the acquisition, and presently, Special Leave Petitions (hereinafter ‘SLPs’) are pending before this Court. 2438. Be that as it may, given the land’s premium nature, and its criticality to the subject acquisition, it is rather intriguing why the State Government has opted to enter into a compromise, knowing full well that doing so would weaken its case in defending the major chunk of the acquisition. We, therefore, in order to satisfy ourselves that the State Government has considered thoroughly all the pros and cons and acted in a bona fide manner to serve the public interest, before making the offer of release, deemed it imperative to delve deeper. 39. A perusal of the original record casts a cloud of doubt on the legal necessity of the entire exercise and has disappointed us regarding the manner in which the State Government’s decision to release the land has been taken. The record reveals that this issue was first discussed in the letter dated 08.09.2023, in which the Appellant (HUDA) noted on record that the land in question cannot be spared. Nevertheless, the Appellant deferred the final decision to the State government. This note was authored by an official in the rank of an Assistant. Following this, the file moved with remarkable celerity and received approval from various departments and officials, including as high as the office of the Additional Chief Secretary, Urban Development on the very same 25date. Unfortunately, none of the officers thought it appropriate to write even a single word while agreeing with the proposal to release the land. This rapid progression raises questions on whether all relevant factors were considered before recommending such approval. The only so called self-speaking note is of the Director General, Urban Estate of the even date, i.e., 08.09.2023, which noted that the file may be “submitted to govt. for approval so that Honorable Apex Court may be informed about view of state…”. The proposal was reportedly approved by the State Government within a period of 3 days only, i.e., on 11.09.2023. Res ipsa loquitor. 40. Even the responses to the questions posed by this Court in its order dated 13.09.2023, moved with swiftness, securing approval at an astonishingly expedited pace upwards, without the addition of even a single word at any level. The responses the record shows, were drafted by an Assistant. 41. We hasten to add here that we have no intention to suggest that bureaucratic swiftness necessarily undermines the thoroughness of the process. Indeed, our administrative setup can do with more such alacrity. Rather, the confluence of circumstances— the land being prime real estate and yet suddenly and inexplicably being excluded from acquisition, crucial policy 26decisions with wide ranging public interest of enormous financial ramifications being discussed and finalized by very junior officials, files receiving approval at exceptional speed, etc.—collectively do not inspire confidence as to the objectivity of the entire process. 42. Despite meticulously analyzing all relevant documents appended with the file, including the cryptic brief notes of the Assistant, we are unable to get any qualitative assistance from the government record. As noted above, there is little discussion about: (i) the effect of release of the Respondents’ land on the remaining acquisition, in light of the challenge pending before the High Court or this Court; (ii) the cascading effect that this compromise would have on the other landowners along with the arguments it would invite on the question of hostility of Article 14, and if so; (iii) the basis of such classification and whether it would be reasonable; (iv) whether the release of the land would affect the contiguity of the land under acquisition and if so, would it impair the planned development of the area under acquisition; and (v) whether the State was competent to release the land in purported exercise of its powers under Section 48 of the 1894 Act when the matter was sub judice before this Court. 2743. None of these issues have been discussed, considered, or analyzed. The decision regarding release of the Respondents’ land is, therefore, manifestly arbitrary. While the State Government undoubtedly possesses the power to release the land for lawful considerations, it cannot do so whimsically, irrationally, without any application of mind, or selectively. Condoning such action would encourage further monocratic release of other lands in complete disregard of the consequences and impact on public interest. This would likely result in the creation of small islands of unacquired lands within large swathes of acquired land. These private enclaves would undoubtedly upset the effectiveness of the rest of the acquisition—making it patently unfair for all other landowners, laying to waste perhaps the very purpose for which their lands were acquired in the first place. Turning futile the acquisition would also render mindless dissipation of the State Exchequer, already expended earlier in the process—reducing returns for all. Although the State Government possesses acknowledgeable power in the lifecycle of the acquisition process, it also bears great responsibility of ensuring its judicious exercise. We cannot, therefore, treat the compromise or release lightly. 2844. Keeping in view the entirety of the exercise and the sum totality of all factors, both apparent and others more insidious, we are unable to accept the parties’ compromise, in terms whereof the disposal of instant appeals is suggested. 45. Having held so, we are not enthused by the Respondents’ conduct either. These unusual events create more than just suspicion that the Respondents have been able to influence the representations of the many, as well as twist and undermine institutions and process meant for the protection of public interest. In their hurry to curry favour with the Respondents, the senior bureaucrats have unfortunately failed to visualise the serious ramifications their actions could have had on the entire acquisition of more than 950 acres land and the law in general. 46. We are thus, of the considered view that this is a case where the bureaucracy abdicated its duty and failed to objectively assist the Decision-Making Authority, in arriving at a just and fair conclusion in conformity with larger public interest. Had the senior officers flagged all the relevant issues on file, we have no reason to doubt that the Competent Authority would have never approved the proposal to release the subject land. 29D.4 Doctrine of merger 47. We must also note that the previous Civil Appeals preferred by the State Government, challenging the same impugned order were dismissed on account of non-prosecution. Hence, there arises an important question with regard to the maintainability of the present appeals. This issue may be conclusively determined by examining the applicability of the doctrine of merger to the peculiar set of circumstances of the instant case. 48. In this respect, in the landmark case of Kunhayammed v.

--- JUDGMENT 124 ---
State of Kerala12, it was held that: “44. To sum up, our conclusions are: (i) Where an appeal or revision is provided against an order passed by a court, tribunal or any other authority before superior forum and such superior forum modifies, reverses or affirms the decision put in issue before it, the decision by the subordinate forum merges in the decision by the superior forum and it is the latter which subsists, remains operative and is capable of enforcement in the eye of law […] (vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court has been invoked the order passed in appeal would attract the doctrine of merger; the order may be of reversal, modification or merely affirmation.” [Emphasis supplied] 12 (2000) 6 SCC 359 3049. The same principle was reiterated in the case of Khoday Distilleries Limited v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Limited, Kollegal13, where this Court held that merger would result if the SLPs were dismissed after granting leave, irrespective of whether reasons were given or not: “20. The Court thereafter analysed number of cases where orders of different nature were passed and dealt with these judgments by classifying them in the following categories: (i) Dismissal at the stage of special leave petition—without reasons—no res judicata, no merger. (ii) Dismissal of the special leave petition by speaking or reasoned order—no merger, but rule of discipline and Article 141 attracted. (iii) Leave granted—dismissal without reasons—merger results.” [Emphasis supplied] 50. In the instant case, leave to appeal was granted vide the order dated 27.08.2010, and the Civil Appeals preferred by the State of Haryana were then dismissed on 16.11.2016. Therefore, since the previous SLPs arising out of the same impugned judgement were dismissed after granting leave, arguably, the doctrine of merger would be attracted. 13 (2019) 4 SCC 376 3151. However, we may hasten to add that in Kunhayammed (supra), this Court held that the doctrine of merger is neither a doctrine of constitutional law nor of statutory recognition. Since it is a common law principle directed towards judicial propriety, the same should not be applied in a straitjacket manner, and the nature of facts and circumstances of that particular case should be considered. 52. Still further, a three-judge bench of this Court—to which one of us (Surya Kant, J.) was a member—in GNCTD v. BSK Realtors,14 analyzed the aforementioned exception to the doctrine of merger and held that the exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution, which enables the Court to do complete justice, would fall under the four corners of such exception. 53. Applying the afore-cited principle to the facts and circumstances of the instant case, we have found that the impugned judgement of the High Court is patently unjust and could adversely affect the subject acquisition, leading to significant harm to the public at large. In light of this, we find it a fit case to invoke our powers under Article 142 of the Constitution and carve 14 GNCTD v. BSK Realtors, 2024 INSC 455. 32out an exception to the doctrine of merger so as to do complete justice to the parties. E. CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS 54. We, thus, deem it appropriate to allow these appeals and dispose of the matter in the following terms and directions: i. The Appeals are allowed; the impugned judgment dated 15.07.2008 of the High Court, which is under challenge in this batch of appeals, is hereby set aside; ii. If there is any other judgement or order of the High Court which is passed following the main judgement dated 15.07.2008, thereby quashing or adversely impacting the subject acquisition, such judgements or orders are also deemed to be set aside; iii. In case no ‘award’ for the land owned by the Respondents was passed earlier, the same shall be passed expeditiously, and in any case within a period of 3 (three) months in accordance with the provisions of the 1894 Act; iv. If an award in respect of the Respondent’s land has already been passed under the 1894 Act, in that event, there will be no necessity to pass a fresh award. However, liberty is 33granted to the Respondents to avail their remedy under Section 18 of the 1894 Act, if so advised. Such reference, if moved by the Respondents within a period of 2 (two) months from the date of uploading of this order on the website, the Reference Court will not dismiss it on the ground of limitation and shall proceed to decide the same on merits and in accordance with law; v. In case the land of the Respondents is found to have same potentiality and utility as that of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh (i.e., land which was acquired vide the notifications dated 16.05.2007 and 27.03.2008), the Respondents will also be entitled to seek compensation at the same rate as has been granted for the said similarly located land; and vi. The State of Haryana and the HSVP are directed to take possession of the subject-land in accordance with law and commence development works without any delay. The land shall be utilized for the public purposes for which it has been acquired. 55. We are sanguine that the State Government is conscious of the principles evolved by this Court in a catena of decisions in 34regard to the violation of public trust doctrine15 and will thus ensure that the acquired land is utilised in public interest in accordance with provisions of the Haryana Development and Regulation of Urban Areas Act, 1975. Consequently, the HSVP will take on the responsibility to develop the entire acquired land strictly in accordance with the public purpose of its acquisition. 56.

--- JUDGMENT 125 ---
2024 INSC 792 Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5932 OF 2023 Union of India … Appellant versus Pranav Srinivasan … Respondent with WRIT PETITION (C) NO.123 OF 2024 J U D G M E N T ABHAY S. OKA, J. 1. The issue involved in these cases concerns the grant of Indian citizenship to Pranav Srinivasan, the respondent in the civil appeal and petitioner in the writ petition. FACTUAL ASPECTS 2. A few factual aspects must be set out to appreciate the factual and legal controversy. The paternal grandparents of Pranav were born in India before independence. Pranav’s father and mother were born in India in 1963 and 1972, respectively. On 19th December 1998, Pranav’s parents adopted citizenship of Singapore. On 1st March 1999, Pranav was born in Singapore as a Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 1 of 25citizen of Singapore. According to the case of Pranav, on 20th April 2012, his parents renounced their Indian citizenship. On 5th May 2017, when Pranav was eighteen years, two months and four days old, he submitted an application in Form XXV specified under Rule 24 of the Citizenship Rules, 2009, read with sub-section (2) of Section 8 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (for short, ‘the 1955 Act’) for resumption of his Indian citizenship. 3. Earlier, Pranav filed a writ petition before the High Court of Judicature at Madras as his application in Form XXV was not considered. Ultimately, it was revealed that Pranav had not paid the necessary fees. Therefore, the High Court permitted Pranav to pay the required fees by the order dated 30th November 2017. The said order was modified by a further order dated 29th November 2018 in the writ petition filed by Pranav, and the High Court directed the concerned authorities to decide the application made by Pranav. By the order dated 30th April 2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs held that Pranav was not eligible for resumption of citizenship under Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act. Pranav was advised to reapply either under clause (f) or clause (g) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. Pranav challenged the said order by filing a writ petition before the learned Single Judge of the High Court. Pranav succeeded before the learned Single Judge Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 2 of 25as it was held that he was entitled to resume his citizenship in accordance with Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act. Being aggrieved, the Union of India preferred an appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court.

--- JUDGMENT 126 ---
The appeal was dismissed. Therefore, Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023 was preferred by the Union of India before this Court. 4. In the civil appeal, an order was passed by this Court on 7th December 2023, directing that the form filled up by Pranav on 5th May 2017 shall be treated as an application filed in Form L of the Citizens (Registration at Indian Consulates) Rules, 1956. A direction was issued to decide the application accordingly. An order was passed on 30th January 2024 by the Ministry of Home Affairs, holding that Pranav was not a person of Indian origin in terms of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. Therefore, he was not eligible for a grant of Indian citizenship under clause (b) of sub- section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. Being aggrieved, Pranav has filed Writ Petition (C) No.123 of 2024 under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. SUBMISSIONS 5. Mr C S Vaidyanathan, the learned senior counsel appearing for Pranav, submitted that within three months of attaining majority, on 5th May 2017, Pranav declared his intention to resume Indian citizenship by filing the application in Form XXV with the Consulate Office Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 3 of 25(Consulate General of India, New York, USA). He was administered the oath of allegiance to the Constitution of India on the date of filing the application. The submission of the learned senior counsel, in short, is that apart from the fact that Pranav was entitled to resume his Indian citizenship by invoking Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act, he is deemed to be an Indian citizen under Article 8 of the Constitution of India by virtue of his grandparents’ birth in undivided India. Moreover, he was entitled to seek Indian citizenship under Section 5(1)(b) of the 1955 Act. 6. The learned senior counsel invited our attention to Articles 5 and 6 of the Constitution, which specifically use the expression “at the commencement of this Constitution.” In contrast, Article 8 uses the expression “whether before or after commencement of the Constitution of India”. Therefore, Article 8, as opposed to Articles 5 and 6, applies even after the commencement of the Constitution. He submitted that by the language used in Section 5 of the 1955 Act, it is crystal clear that a person can acquire Indian citizenship either by virtue of constitutional provisions or by taking recourse to the 1955 Act. Article 8 is an independent and distinct source of citizenship. 7. It was submitted that Pranav’s grandparents were born in the State of Tamil Nadu, which was part of Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 4 of 25undivided India before 15th August 1947. His maternal grandparents were also born in the undivided India before independence. Therefore, under Article 8, Pranav qualified to become an Indian citizen. It is submitted that the failure of the Union of India to recognise and enforce a constitutional provision is an arbitrary exercise of power. The learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Anoop Baranwal v. Union of India [Election Commission Appointments]1 in the context of the right to vote. He also relied upon another decision in the case of Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community & Another.

--- JUDGMENT 127 ---
v. State of Maharashtra & Anr.2, wherein this Court held that the role of the constitutional Courts is to interpret the Constitution, considering the changing needs of the society. 8. The learned senior counsel submitted that, independently of the constitutional provisions, Pranav is entitled to be registered as an Indian citizen under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. He submitted that Pranav is a person of Indian origin as his parents were born within the territory of India after independence. He submitted that a common sense of interpretation would have to be given to the phrase “in such other territory which became part of India after the 1 (2023) 6 SCC 161 2 (2023) 4 SCC 541 Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 5 of 2515th day of August 1947,” occurring in Explanation-2 to Section 5 of the 1955 Act. Therefore, it includes all those territories which were part of the undivided India and continued to be a part of the independent India. He submitted that if the interpretation put to the said provision by the Union of India is accepted, persons whose parents were born in the States like Goa and Sikkim would be the persons of Indian origin but who are born in the territories which continued to be a part of India after independence, would be denied the same benefit. Therefore, a person of Indian origin can acquire Indian citizenship if it is shown that the grandparents were born in the undivided India and the parents were born in India after its independence. 9. He submitted that the words “minor child”, occurring in Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act, will include an unborn child or a child in the womb. He submitted that Section 3 of the 1955 Act talks about the acquisition of citizenship by birth, whereas Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act talks about a minor child. Therefore, a child need not have been born in India to be entitled to the benefit of seeking resumption of Indian citizenship under Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act. 10. Mr K M Nataraj, the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) appearing for the Union of India, submitted that Articles 5 to 9 of the Constitution of India determine Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 6 of 25who the Indian citizens were at the commencement of the Constitution. These Articles provide for the acquisition of citizenship by the persons eligible therein at the commencement of the Constitution. Article 9 disqualifies a person from acquiring citizenship under Articles 5, 6 or 8 if such person has voluntarily acquired citizenship of any foreign State. He also invited our attention to Articles 10 and 11. He submitted that Article 10 provides that every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under the provisions of Part II of the Constitution of India shall, subject to the provisions of any law that the Parliament may make, continue to be such citizen. Article 11 protects the Parliament's power to make provisions concerning the acquisition and termination of citizenship. 11. The learned ASG relied upon the speech of the late Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly, which indicated that the provisions in the Constitution deal with citizenship on the date of commencement of the Constitution. Therefore, his submission is that Articles 5 to 9 determine who are Indian citizens at the commencement of the Constitution of India. After the enactment of the 1955 Act, India's citizenship can be acquired, terminated, or otherwise regulated under the provisions thereof. He submitted that Pranav is not a Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 7 of 25person of Indian origin. Therefore, Section 5(1)(b) of the 1955 Act will not apply. 12. He submitted that Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act will have no application. He submitted that Pranav’s parents lost their citizenship the moment they acquired the citizenship of Singapore. When Pranav was born, his parents were no longer Indian citizens. They lost Indian citizenship upon the acquisition of Singapore citizenship. He would, therefore, submit that Pranav is not entitled to Indian citizenship. 13. The learned senior counsel appearing for Pranav submitted that Article 8 will apply in the present case. He submitted that it was never the stand of the Union of India before the High Court that the Indian citizenship of Pranav’s parents came to an end by termination. This stand is taken for the first time before this Court by the Union of India. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 14. Part II of the Constitution deals with ‘Citizenship’. It consists of Articles 5 to 11, which read thus: “5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.—At the commencement of this Constitution Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 8 of 25every person who has his domicile in the territory of India and— (a) who was born in the territory of India; or (b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or (c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement, shall be a citizen of India. 6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.—Notwithstanding anything in Article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution if— (a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and (b) (i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 9 of 25(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that Government: Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application. 7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.— Notwithstanding anything in Articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory now included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India: Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes of Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 10 of 25clause (b) of Article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948. 8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India.—Notwithstanding anything in Article 5, any person who or either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted), and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the time being residing on an application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of this Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of India or the Government of India. 9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be citizens.—No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of Article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of Article 6 or Article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State. Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 11 of 2510. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.—Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen. 11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.” On the face of it, Article 5 will apply to a person who is domiciled in the territory of India on 26th January 1950. Therefore, this provision will not apply in the present case. Article 6 will have no application as it applies to persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan. Article 7 deals with the rights of the citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 128 ---
Now, let us analyse Article 8. It applies to a person:- (i) who was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (for short, ‘the 1935 Act’) as originally enacted; or Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 12 of 25(ii) either of whose parents were born in India as defined in the 1935 Act as originally enacted; or (iii) any of whose grandparents were born in India as defined in the 1935 Act as originally enacted. and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India so defined. Such a person shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the time being residing, on an application made by him in prescribed form before such diplomatic or consular representative, before or after the commencement of the Constitution. The words “before or after the commencement of this Constitution” qualify the words “the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the time being residing”. Therefore, a person who is qualified in terms of the first part of Article 8 can apply to the diplomatic or consular representative of India in any country where he is residing before or after the commencement of the Constitution. He need not apply to the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 13 of 25country where he was residing at the commencement of the Constitution.

--- JUDGMENT 129 ---
16. If Article 8 was intended to apply to a foreign national born after the commencement of the Constitution, the provision would not be referring to “who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India so defined”. So defined means India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted. Moreover, Article 8 uses the expression “who is ordinarily residing”. Therefore, the provision will only apply to someone ordinarily residing on the date of commencement of the Constitution in any country outside India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted. If the interpretation sought to be given on behalf of Pranav to article 8 is accepted, someone born, say in the year 2000, who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted, would be entitled to claim citizenship of India on the ground that any of his parents or grandparents were born in that part of Pakistan or Bangladesh which was part of India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted. We are giving this illustration to show that the interpretation of Article 8 sought to be made on behalf of Pranav would produce absurd results which the framers of the Constitution never intended. Therefore, Article 8 will have no application to Pranav’s case. Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc.

--- JUDGMENT 130 ---
Page 14 of 2517. Article 10 provides that every citizen deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of the provisions of Articles 5 to 8 shall continue to be such citizen subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament. Article 11 protects the power of the Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship or all the matters relating to citizenship. CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE 1955 ACT 18. Now, we turn to the provisions of the 1955 Act. Pranav has not claimed citizenship by birth (Section 3) or citizenship by descent (Section 4). He has claimed citizenship under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. Section 5 of the 1955 Act reads thus: “5. Citizenship by registration.― (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs to any of the following categories, namely:― (a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an application for registration; Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 15 of 25(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place outside undivided India; (c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an application for registration; (d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India; (e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of India under clause (a) of this sub-section or sub-section (1) of section 6; (f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of independent India, and is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months immediately before making an application for registration; (g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder for five years, and who is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months before making an application for registration. Explanation 1.―For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if― Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 16 of 25(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months immediately before making an application for registration; and (ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding the said period of twelve months for a period of not less than six years. Explanation 2.―For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory which became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947. (1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special circumstances exist, may after recording the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months, specified in clauses (f) and (g) and clause (i) of Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up to a maximum of thirty days which may be in different breaks. (2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1) until he has taken the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule. (3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his Indian citizenship or whose Indian Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 17 of 25citizenship has terminated, under this Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1) except by order of the Central Government. (4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are special circumstances justifying such registration, cause any minor to be registered as a citizen of India. (5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of India by registration as from the date on which he is so registered; and a person registered under the provisions of clause (b)(ii) of article 6 or article 8 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be a citizen of India by registration as from the commencement of the Constitution or the date on which he was so registered, whichever may be later. (6) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to grant exemption from the residential requirement under clause (c) of sub- section (1) to any person or a class of persons, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant such exemption.” (emphasis added) For applicability of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act, Pranav will have to establish that he is a person of Indian origin who is an ordinary resident in Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 18 of 25any country or place outside undivided India. In view of explanation 2 to Section 5, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if (i) he or either of his parents were born in undivided India or (ii) in any such other territory which was not part of undivided India, but became part of India after 15th August 1947. There is no third category mentioned in the explanation. If undivided India were to include India after independence, the legislature would not have included the category of the person or either of his parents being born in such other territory which became part of India after the 15th August 1947. Section 2(h) of the 1955 Act provides that “undivided India” means India as defined in the 1935 Act. If we read “undivided India” as India as on or after 15th August 1947, we would be doing violence to the plain language of the Explanation. We cannot read something that is not in the provision, especially when there is no ambiguity in the provision. Therefore, we cannot read Explanation 2 the way the learned senior counsel of Pranav wants us to read. Pranav and both his parents were not born in the undivided India. His parents were born after independence in independent India. They were not born in any part of undivided India or any territory that became part of India after 15th August 1947. Therefore, Section 5(1)(b) of the 1955 Act has no application. Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 19 of 2519.

--- JUDGMENT 131 ---
At this stage, it is necessary to refer to Sections 8 and 9 of the 1955 Act, which read thus: “8. Renunciation of citizenship.― (1) If any citizen of India of full age and capacity, makes in the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship, the declaration shall be registered by the prescribed authority; and, upon such registration, that person shall cease to be a citizen of India: Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war in which India may be engaged, registration thereof shall be withheld until the Central Government otherwise directs. (2) Where a person ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-section (1), every minor child of that person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India: Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age, make a declaration in the prescribed form and manner that he wishes to resume Indian citizenship and shall thereupon again become a citizen of India. 9. Termination of citizenship.—(1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration or otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the 26th January, 1950 and the commencement of this Act voluntarily acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such acquisition or, as the case may be, such Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 20 of 25commencement, cease to be a citizen of India: Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall apply to a citizen of India who, during any war in which India may be engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country, until the Central Government otherwise directs. (2) If any question arises as to whether, when or how any citizen of India has acquired the citizenship of another country, it shall be determined by such authority, in such manner, and having regard to such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.” (emphasis added) In view of Section 9(1), those citizens of India who voluntarily acquire citizenship of another Country after the commencement of the 1955 Act, or between 26th January 1950 and the date of the commencement of the 1955 Act, upon acquisition of such citizenship, automatically cease to be citizens of India. It is not in dispute that Pranav's parents acquired Singapore citizenship on 19th December 1998, before his birth when he was in the womb. Therefore, immediately after the voluntary acquisition of Singapore citizenship, Pranav’s parents ceased to be citizens of India by the operation of Section 9(1). Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 21 of 2520. Section 8(1) will apply if any citizen of India of full age and capacity makes, in the prescribed manner, a declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship. Section 8(1) will not apply to the involuntary cessation of citizenship by the operation of law as provided in Section 9(1). Section 8(2) will apply only if the minor child's parents had voluntarily renounced citizenship by making a declaration. In the facts of the case, on 19th December 1998, when Pranav’s parents voluntarily acquired citizens of Singapore, they immediately ceased to be citizens of India by operation of Section 9(1). Therefore, there was no occasion for Pranav’s parents to renounce their citizenship on 20th April 2012 by the mode provided under Section 8(1) as they had already ceased to be citizens of India on 19th December 1998 when they voluntarily acquired the citizenship of Singapore. As Pranav’s parents ceased to be citizens of India, not voluntarily but by the operation of Section 9(1), Section 8(2) does not apply to Pranav. Therefore, Section 8(2) will not assist Pranav. 21.

--- JUDGMENT 132 ---
….. The fundamental and elementary rule of construction is that the words and phrases used by the 3 (1962) 45 ITR 414 : 1962 SCC OnLine SC 12 Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 22 of 25legislature shall be given their ordinary meaning and shall be construed according to the rules of grammar. When a language is plain and unambiguous and admits of only one meaning, no question of construction of a statute arises, for the Act speaks for itself. It is a well- recognized rule of construction that the meaning must be collected from the expressed intention of the legislature.” (emphasis added) The language used in the provisions of the 1955 Act is plain and simple. Hence, the same should be given ordinary and natural meaning. Moreover, we are dealing with a law which provides for the grant of citizenship of India to foreign nationals. There is no scope to bring equitable considerations while interpreting such a statute. As the language of Sections 5, 8 and 9 is plain and simple, there is no scope for its liberal interpretation. Citizenship of India cannot be conferred on foreign citizens by doing violence to the plain language of the 1955 Act. 22. Now, only clause (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act survives for consideration. However, under the said provision, Pranav can apply for Indian citizenship provided he is an ordinary resident of India for twelve months immediately preceding the date of application. There is a power to relax the period of twelve months Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc.

--- JUDGMENT 133 ---
Some arguments were made that this Court should exercise its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. The power under Article 142 is an power which should be exercised to deal with exceptional circumstances. We do not think that this case warrants the exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. This Court will have to be very circumspect when it comes to the exercise of power under Article 142 for the grant of citizenship of India to a foreign national. 25. Therefore, the impugned orders in Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023 are set aside. Appeal is allowed. Writ Petition (C) No.123 of 2024 is dismissed. However, this judgment will not preclude Pranav from applying for citizenship by invoking clause (f) of sub-section (1) of Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. Page 24 of 25Section 5 of the 1955 Act. It will also be open for him to apply to the Central Government for the exercise of power under sub-section (1A) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act of relaxation of the period of twelve months provided in clause (f) of sub-section (1) Section 5 of the 1955 Act. ...…………………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 134 ---
1 2024 INSC 770 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5919 OF 2023 SHINGARA SINGH …. APPELLANT VERSUS DALJIT SINGH & ANR ...RESPONDENTS J U D G M E N T PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 1. The defendant No. 2 in the suit has preferred this appeal challenging the judgment and decree passed by the High Court allowing the appeal preferred by the plaintiff/Daljit Singh to set aside the judgment and decree of the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court which concurrently decreed the suit partially2 only for the alternative relief of recovery of Rs. 40,000/- along with interest while dismissing the suit in respect of specific performance of the agreement dated 17.08.1990. 2. The facts of the case emerging from the pleadings of the parties are that plaintiff/Daljit Singh instituted the suit on 24.12.1992 claiming specific performance of the agreement to sell dated 17.08.1990 in respect of the land measuring 79 Kanals 09 marlas @ of Rs. 80,000/- per acre against the payment of earnest money of Rs. 40,000/- and the balance amount of Rs. 7,54,000/- at the time of execution and registration of the sale deed on or before 30.11.1992. 3. According to the plaintiff, he remained present in the office of the Sub-Registrar on 30.11.1992 with the balance sale consideration and all the expenses for stamp papers but defendant no. 1 did not turn up to perform his part of the agreement. The plaintiff marked his presence by submitting an affidavit before the Executive Magistrate. The suit was preferred within 23 days as stipulated in the agreement. Defendant no. 1 initially denied the execution of the agreement3 to sell, much less, receipt of the earnest money with further averment that the subject land was a Joint Hindu Family property. During the pendency of the suit, the present appellant/defendant no. 2/Shingrara Singh was impleaded on 25.01.1993 on the basis that defendant no. 1/ Janraj Singh executed a sale deed in his favour on 08.01.1993 in respect of the suit land on the basis of alleged agreement to sell dated 19.11.1990 for a sum of Rs. 6,45,937.50. It is to be noted that the Trial Court passed an order of status quo on 24.12.1992 qua alienation with regard to the share of defendant no. 1.

--- JUDGMENT 135 ---
4. Defendant No. 2/appellant filed his separate written statement stating that defendant no. 1 has sold the property to him by executing a registered sale deed on 08.01.1993 and delivered possession after which mutation has also been carried out. According to the appellant/defendant no. 2, the agreement, basing which the suit is filed, is a fabricated ante- dated document because defendant no. 1 did not disclose the factum of this agreement while executing the sale deed in his favour and thus, the appellant/defendant no. 2 is a bona fide purchaser.4 5. In the Trial Court plaintiff examined himself as PW-2, Deed Writer/ Kulwant Singh as PW-1, Jasjit Singh as PW-3 whereas defendants examined Kirpan Singh as DW 1, Shangara Singh as DW 2, B.M. Sehgal as DW 3 and Subhash Chander as DW 4. The Trial Court vide its judgment dated 27.04.2007 held that the plaintiff has proved the agreement to sell wherein defendant no. 2 has failed to prove that the agreement is a result of fraud and fabricated document. However, the Trial Court denied the decree for specific performance on the ground that since defendant no. 2 is the owner in possession of the suit land upon execution of the sale deed dated 08.01.1993, defendant no. 1 has left with no right or title of the suit land. Thus, he is unable to execute the sale deed in favour of the plaintiff and moreover the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 are close relative. The Trial Court also held that the plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. It was also held that defendant no. 2 is a bona fide purchaser as he was not having any knowledge about the agreement to sell between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1. The Trial Court5 eventually dismissed the suit in respect of the specific performance but allowed the alternative prayer for recovery of Rs. 40,000/- with interest @ 12% per annum. 6. The First Appellate Court maintained the Trial Court’s judgment and decree by holding that the subject sale agreement is a result of fraud and collusion between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1. The First Appellate Court observed that in his first written statement he denied the execution of the agreement but subsequently after amendment in the plaint and impleadment of the appellant, he admitted the claim of the plaintiff. The First Appellate Court further observed that the doctrine of lis pendens is not applicable in the facts of the present case. 7. The High Court, under the impugned judgment in this appeal, opined that the sale deed executed by defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant no. 2/appellant is hit by doctrine of lis pendens and that defendant no. 2/appellant is not a bona fide purchaser. The High Court noted that the suit was filed on 24.12.1992 and the next date before the Trial Court was fixed6 on 12.01.1993. However, the sale deed was executed by defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant no. 2 on 08.01.1993. Both defendant no.

--- JUDGMENT 136 ---
Hrin P. Raval, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant argued that the High Court ought not to have disturbed the concurrent judgment and order passed by the Trial Court and the Appellate Court. On the other hand, Mr. Manoj Swarup, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents argued that the7 judgment and order passed by the Trial Court and the Appellate Court being based on perverse findings and reasoning, the High Court has rightly set aside the same for decreeing the plaintiff’s suit in respect of specific performance. According to him, the High Court has rightly applied the doctrine of lis pendens. 9. Before proceeding to deal with the applicability of doctrine of lis pendens, it is significant to note that Issue no. 5 framed by the Trial Court was to the effect as to whether the agreement dated 17.08.1990 is a result of fraud and collusion, therefore, not binding on defendant no. 1. This issue was decided against the defendant. When the plaintiff preferred first appeal, the defendant did not move any cross-appeal or cross- objections, yet the first Appellate Court entered into this aspect of the matter to hold that the subject agreement was collusive between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1.

--- JUDGMENT 137 ---
This is not permissible in view of the law laid down by this Court in Banarsi vs. Ram Phal1 wherein this Court held thus in paras 10 & 11: 1 (2003) 9 SCC 6068 “10. The CPC amendment of 1976 has not materially or substantially altered the law except for a marginal difference. Even under the amended Order 41 Rule 22 sub-rule (1) a party in whose favour the decree stands in its entirety is neither entitled nor obliged to prefer any cross-objection. However, the insertion made in the text of sub-rule (1) makes it permissible to file a cross-objection against a finding. The difference which has resulted we will shortly state. A respondent may defend himself without filing any cross- objection to the extent to which decree is in his favour; however, if he proposes to attack any part of the decree, he must take cross- objection. The amendment inserted by the 1976 amendment is clarificatory and also enabling and this may be made precise by analysing the provision. There may be three situations: (i) The impugned decree is partly in favour of the appellant and partly in favour of the respondent. (ii) The decree is entirely in favour of the respondent though an issue has been decided against the respondent. (iii) The decree is entirely in favour of the respondent and all the issues have also been answered in favour of the respondent but there is a finding in the judgment which goes against the respondent. 11. In the type of case (i) it was necessary for the respondent to file an appeal or take cross- objection against that part of the decree which is against him if he seeks to get rid of the same though that part of the decree which is in his favour he is entitled to support without taking any cross-objection. The law remains so post-9 amendment too. In the type of cases (ii) and (iii) pre-amendment CPC did not entitle nor permit the respondent to take any cross- objection as he was not the person aggrieved by the decree. Under the amended CPC, read in the light of the explanation, though it is still not necessary for the respondent to take any cross- objection laying challenge to any finding adverse to him as the decree is entirely in his favour and he may support the decree without cross-objection; the amendment made in the text of sub-rule (1), read with the explanation newly inserted, gives him a right to take cross- objection to a finding recorded against him either while answering an issue or while dealing with an issue. The advantage of preferring such cross-objection is spelled out by sub-rule (4). In spite of the original appeal having been withdrawn or dismissed for default the cross- objection taken to any finding by the respondent shall still be available to be adjudicated upon on merits which remedy was not available to the respondent under the unamended CPC. In the pre-amendment era, the withdrawal or dismissal for default of the original appeal disabled the respondent to question the correctness or otherwise of any finding recorded against the respondent.” 10. In the case at hand, the Trial Court had partly decreed the suit to the extent of recovery of Rs. 40,000/-. This part of the decree was not challenged by the defendants either by filing a separate appeal or by way of cross objections. They did not prefer any cross objection challenging the finding on issue no.10 5. In this situation the defendants have conceded to the decree for refund and finding on issue no. 5. Therefore, in absence of cross-appeal or cross-objections by the defendants, the First Appellate Court could not have recorded a finding that the subject agreement was a result of collusion between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1.

--- JUDGMENT 138 ---
Before one-and-half century, in Bellamy v. Sabine [(1857) 1 De G & J 566 : 44 ER 842] , Lord Cranworth, L.C. proclaimed that where a litigation is pending between a plaintiff and a defendant as to the right to a particular estate, the necessities of mankind require that the decision of the court in the suit shall be binding not only on the litigating parties, but also on those who derive title under them by alienations made pending the suit, whether such alienees had or had not notice of the pending proceedings. If this were not so, there could be no certainty that the litigation would ever come to an end. 2 (2008) 7 SCC 14411 23. It is thus settled law that a purchaser of suit property during the pendency of litigation has no right to resist or obstruct execution of decree passed by a competent court. The doctrine of “lis pendens” prohibits a party from dealing with the property which is the subject- matter of suit. “Lis pendens” itself is treated as constructive notice to a purchaser that he is bound by a decree to be entered in the pending suit. Rule 102, therefore, clarifies that there should not be resistance or obstruction by a transferee pendente lite. It declares that if the resistance is caused or obstruction is offered by a transferee pendente lite of the judgment- debtor, he cannot seek benefit of Rules 98 or 100 of Order 21.” 12. This Court in Sanjay Verma vs. Manik Roy3 was dealing with a suit for specific performance. During pendency of the suit, a temporary injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiff and different portions of the suit land were sold whereafter the purchasers applied for impleadment, which was rejected by the Trial Court but allowed by the High Court against which special leave to appeal was filed. In the above background, this Court observed the following in para 12: “12. The principles specified in Section 52 of the TP Act are in accordance with equity, good conscience or justice because they rest upon an equitable and just foundation that it will be 3 (2006) 13 SCC 60812 impossible to bring an action or suit to a successful termination if alienations are permitted to prevail. A transferee pendente lite is bound by the decree just as much as he was a party to the suit. The principle of lis pendens embodied in Section 52 of the TP Act being a principle of public policy, no question of good faith or bona fide arises. The principle underlying Section 52 is that a litigating party is exempted from taking notice of a title acquired during the pendency of the litigation. The mere pendency of a suit does not prevent one of the parties from dealing with the property constituting the subject-matter of the suit. The section only postulates a condition that the alienation will in no manner affect the rights of the other party under any decree which may be passed in the suit unless the property was alienated with the permission of the court.” 13. Guruswamy Nadar vs. P. Lakshmi Ammal4 also arose out of a suit for specific performance of agreement wherein this Court considered the effect of subsequent sale of properties by owner (proposed vendor) in favour of a third party. In the above facts, this Court held thus in paras 9 & 15: “9. Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act clearly says subsequent sale can be enforced for good and sufficient reason but in the present case, there is no difficulty because the suit was filed on 3-5-1975 for specific performance of the 4 (2008) 5 SCC 79613 agreement and the second sale took place on 5-5-1975. Therefore, it is the admitted position that the second sale was definitely after the filing of the suit in question. Had that not been the position then we would have evaluated the effect of Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act read with Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act. But in the present case it is more than apparent that the suit was filed before the second sale of the property. Therefore, the principle of lis pendens will govern the present case and the second sale cannot have the overriding effect on the first sale. 15. So far as the present case is concerned, it is apparent that the appellant who is a subsequent purchaser of the same property, has purchased in good faith but the principle of lis pendens will certainly be applicable to the present case notwithstanding the fact that under Section 19(b) of the Specific Relief Act his rights could be protected.” 14. In a recent judgment of this Court in Chander Bhan (D) through Lr. Sher Singh vs. Mukhtiar Singh & Ors.5 it is observed, “once it has been held that the transactions executed by the respondents are illegal due to the doctrine of lis pendens the defence of the respondents 1 – 2 that they are bona fide purchasers for valuable consideration and thus, entitled to 5 204 INSC 37714 protection under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is liable to be rejected.” 15. In the case in hand also, it is an admitted position that the suit was filed on 24.12.1992 and the sale deed was executed on 08.01.1993 by defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant no. 2/appellant during pendency of the suit. The doctrine of lis pendens as contained in Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 applies to a transaction during pendency of the suit. The Trial Court found execution of agreement to be proved and directed for refund of the amount of Rs. 40,000/- by defendant no. 1 to the plaintiff/appellant with further finding on issue no. 5 that the agreement was not a result of fraud and collusion. The defendant did not prefer any cross-appeal or cross- objections against the said partial decree and allowed the finding to become final. The plaintiff was non-suited only on the ground that defendant no. 2 had no notice of the agreement and is a bona fide purchaser. However, once sale agreement is proved and the subsequent sale was during pendency of the suit hit by the doctrine of lis pendens, the High Court was fully15 justified in setting aside the judgment and decree of the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court and passing a decree for specific performance. 16. In our considered view, the High Court has not committed any error of law in rendering the judgment impugned which is hereby affirmed and the instant appeal deserves to be and is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs.

--- JUDGMENT 139 ---
To support the conclusion, S. Ravindra Bhat, J. has said that, in reality, there is one unified service which is rendered to the consumer, that is, the credit card holder, and the merchant. The subsequent bifurcation in the context and the nature of the transaction, read with Sections 66 and 68 of the Act and Rule 5(1) of the Service Tax (Determination 2 For short, “The Act.” 2Civil Appeal No. 8228/2019 etc. of Value) Rules, 2006, is immaterial as MDR is taxable and service fee is to be taxed. MDR, as a service, has been taxed and also paid. 6. We wonder whether the Revenue would have accepted the bifurcation as argued by them in case the acquiring bank and the issuing bank had taken the stand which is now taken by them. While interpreting a tax provision, one must keep in mind that the legislature ennobles the ease of collection of tax and payment of tax. These principles, especially when there is no loss of revenue, can be taken into consideration for interpreting a provision in case of doubt or debate. 7. It is pertinent to note that even the opinion expressed by K.M. Joseph, J., while adopting a different interpretation of Section 65 (33a) of the Act, goes on to hold, vide paragraphs 86 onwards of the judgment, that there should not be double taxation. However, it has been observed thereafter that the onus to show that payment of service tax on the entire MDR was made by the acquiring bank will be on the issuing bank, that is, the respondent, M/s. Citibank N.A. 8. We would, on the last aspect, observe that the entire data and details are available with the Service Tax Department and could have been easily ascertained before issuance of the show cause notice. Interestingly, the show cause notice proceeds on the basis that, regardless of the service tax 3Civil Appeal No. 8228/2019 etc. paid by the acquiring bank on the full MDR, the issuing bank would be liable to pay service tax on the proportion of its share in the MDR, which is the interchange fee. 9. We find that the entire amount of the service tax payable on the MDR has been paid to the Government and there is no loss of revenue. 10. Recording the aforesaid, the Reference and appeals are disposed of, holding that service tax is not separately payable on the interchange fee, as service tax has been paid on the MDR. 11.

--- JUDGMENT 140 ---
The present appeal arises out of a charge sheet filed in First Information Report bearing no. RC 7/E/2014 registered with the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) (Bank Securities and Fraud Cell), Mumbai, for the offences punishable under Sections 420, 468, 471 and 120-B of IPC and Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, ‘the PC Act’). Charge sheet was filed for the said offences on 8th August 2014. A total of seven accused persons were charge- sheeted, including the respondent herein, who was shown as accused no.7. At the relevant time, he was the Chairman and Managing Director of the Central Bank of India (for short “the Bank”). Accused no.1 was M/s Electrotherm (India) Limited (for Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 1 of 11short, “the Company”). Accused no.2-Mukesh Bhanwarlal Bhandari was the Chairman of the Company. Accused no.3- Shailesh Bhanwarlal Bhandari was the Managing Director of the Company. Accused no.4-Avinash Prakashchandra Bhandari was the Joint Managing Director of the Company. Accused no.5 was one Hector Keki Vesuna, who was, at the relevant time, the Chief General Manager (Credit) of the Bank. Accused no. 6 was Ramnath Pradeep, who was an Executive Director of the Bank at the relevant time. 2.

--- JUDGMENT 141 ---
2891 of 2023 Page 2 of 114. It was alleged that the Company requested Lal Darwaja Branch of the Bank at Ahmedabad, to open a Standby Letter of Credit (SBLC) for an amount of USD 15 million in favour of Apple Commodities Ltd in Hong Kong for the supply of coal. Under the said facility, while the Bank had to pay USD 15 million to the banker of Apple Commodities Ltd., the Company neither imported the coal to India nor was any payment arranged from the overseas buyer to whom the Company allegedly sold the coal. Similarly, the Company opened another SBLC for Euro 2.05 million in favour of Castleshine Pte. Ltd., Singapore, for the supply of a Continuous Hot Strip Mill for the proposed steel plant to be set up in Tanzania. The Bank had to pay Euro 2.05 million to the bank of M/s. Castleshine Pte. Ltd., though the Company did not procure any machinery. The allegation is that the Bank was put to an undue loss of Rs.436.74 crores, and there was a corresponding gain to the Company. 5. An application for discharge made by the respondent (accused no.7) was rejected by the learned Special Judge of C.B.I., Court. In a revision application filed by the respondent before the High Court, by the impugned judgment, the High Court has discharged the respondent. The Appellant-CBI, being aggrieved by the said judgment, is before this Court. SUBMISSIONS 6. In support of the appeal, the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) submitted that though the conduct of a mini- trial was not contemplated at the stage of framing of Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 3 of 11the charge, the High Court has purported to conduct a mini- trial in this case. She submitted that to prove allegations of conspiracy, it is not necessary that all the co-conspirators must know every detail of the conspiracy, and it is not essential that every accused must participate in the conspiracy from its inception to the last. She submits that even a strong suspicion created by the material forming part of the charge sheet is sufficient for framing the charge. The learned ASG pointed out the material forming part of the charge sheet against the respondent. She submitted that a proposal regarding the EPC facility of Rs.330 crores was added by a witness-V.K. Nagpal, on instruction of accused no.5, though there was no recommendation made by the zonal office to the proposal. She submitted that this was done on 10th August 2010, and on the same day, accused no.5 and 6 prepared a Memorandum to be submitted to the management committee. The said two accused and respondent signed the Memorandum on the same date. She submitted that undue hurry was shown for sanctioning an EPC facility of Rs.330 crores to the Company. She submitted that for the sake of alleged efficiency, the due process required to be followed for sanctioning credit facilities could not have been sacrificed. She submitted that no application was made by the Company for a grant of EPC facility. It is submitted that though there may not be any allegation of receipt of pecuniary benefits against the respondent, he abused his official position as a public servant and indulged himself in mischief or criminal misconduct, as provided in Section 13(1)(d) of the PC Act. She submitted that Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 4 of 11at the stage of framing of the charge, the High Court could not have gone into the veracity of the allegations made by the prosecuting agency in the charge sheet, and this is a case where trial ought to proceed against the respondent. 7. Learned senior counsel representing the respondent has taken us through the material forming part of the charge sheets. His submission is that taking the material in the charge sheets as it is, no case was made out to proceed against the respondent, and therefore, no interference was called for. High Court has rightly discharged the respondent. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 8. We have perused the charge sheet, the statements of witnesses and other material accompanying the charge sheet. The allegations against the respondent are found mainly in paragraph no.3 of the chargesheet. It is alleged that the accused, with the object of cheating the Bank, granted the three facilities mentioned above to the Company. In paragraph 3 of the charge sheet, it is stated that in furtherance of the conspiracy, accused nos.5 to 7: (i) hurriedly got the Memorandum to the Management Committee prepared; (ii) without proper appraisal by the Credit Department/Central Office, without clearance by the New Business Group added/inserted EPC limit of Rs.330 crores for execution of an export order for setting up a steel plant in Tanzania, Africa by the Company. Standby letters Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 5 of 11of Credit (SBLC) within the LC limit, without any written request from the Company were allowed. (iii) The Memorandum was hurriedly approved by accused no.6 and the respondent on 10.08.2010 for placing the Memorandum before the Management Committee of the Board of Directors. The said Memorandum was placed before the Management Committee in its meeting held on 13.08.2010, and based on the recommendations in the Memorandum to the Management Committee, the credit facilities, i.e. (i) Short Term Loan of Rs.50 crore, (ii) LC/SBLC/Buyer's Credit limit of Rs.100 crore and EPC limit of Rs.339 crore were sanctioned to the Company. The sanction was conveyed by the Credit Department, Central Office of the ZO/Branch vide letter dated 18.8.2010.” These are the allegations against the respondent in the charge sheet. 9. We have perused the statements of the relevant witnesses and the documents on record in the charge sheet and the supplementary charge sheet. We may note here that there are no allegations against the respondent as regards the sanction of SBLC. There is no material placed in the charge sheets to show that the respondent has played any role in sanction of SBLC. The statement of Shri Ayodhya Prasad Dwivedi, who is retired General Manager of the Bank (PW-3), refers to recommendations of the zonal office for sanctioning the first two facilities of Rs. 50 crores and Rs.100 crores Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 6 of 11respectively. He stated that he could not find any recommendation from the zonal office for sanctioning the EPC facility. He has referred to the Memorandum submitted to the Management Committee, which refers to the EPC facility of Rs.330 crores. He stated that there was a summary note bearing the signatures of accused nos.5 to 7. He stated that the Memorandum was put up before the Loan Advisory Committee on 11th August 2010. The Loan Advisory Committee recommended the proposal. He duly signed the recommendation along with accused no.6 and Dr. Ram Saduba Sangapure, Manager, Risk Management. The Loan Advisory Committee recommended the proposal on the terms and conditions proposed in the Executive Brief. He stated that the Management Committee meeting held on 13th August 2010 was attended by respondents nos. 5 to 7, Executive Director Shri Arun Kaul, Shri M.S. Zohar, Shri Ved Prakash, Shri B.S.

--- JUDGMENT 142 ---
10. At this stage, we may note that according to the prosecution, the usual procedure followed by the Bank at the relevant time was that credit proposals were processed by the Branch and submitted to the zonal office. After the recommendation of the zonal office, the proposals were examined by the Credit Department in the Head Office. The Memorandum duly signed was used to be placed before the Loan Advisory Group of six General Managers. The loan proposals were thereafter presented before the Management Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 7 of 11Committee, comprising the Chairman and Managing Director, whole-time Directors, RBI Nominee Director, and 3 other directors, including at least 2 independent directors, one of them being chairman of the Audit Committee. The Memorandum placed before the Management Committee was prepared by the Bank's Credit Department and signed by the Deputy General Manager (Credit) and General Manager (Credit). 11. Dr Ram Saduba Sangapure (PW-4) was a Member of the Committee of New Business Group (NBG) and Loan Advisory Committee (LAC). He stated that NBG examines large credit proposals concerning new borrowers and takes a view.

--- JUDGMENT 143 ---
He stated that as per the practice that prevailed at the relevant time in the Bank, after receiving regular proposals from the branch/zonal office, the same was processed by the Credit Department. Recommendations of the Credit Department in Executive Brief format used to be sent to the Risk Management Department to weigh the risk involved. After that, it used to be placed before the LAC. Subsequently, the proposal used to be placed before the Executive Director and CMD. After their clearance, the proposal was placed before the Management Committee for a final decision. He also referred to the Memorandum of Management Committee dated 10th August 2010, which contained a proposal for the grant of EPC facility in the sum of Rs. 330 crores. He stated that the summary note containing the signatures of the accused nos. 5 to 7, and the Memorandum were placed before the Loan Advisory Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 8 of 11Committee on 11th August 2010, which recommended sanction on the terms and conditions proposed in the Executive Brief. After that, on 13th August 2010, the Management Committee approved the proposal. Witness Shri Sivasubramanian Gopalakrishnan (PW-5) stated that NBG clearance for admitting the proposal was issued. 12. The statement of Shri Vinod Kumar Nagpal (PW-10) refers to NBG approval given on 10th August 2010. However, witness Shri Salim Gangadharan (PW-18) stated that the central office entertained the proposal without the recommendation of the zonal office. He stated that though he was a nominee Director of RBI, he did not attend the Management Committee meeting dated 13th August 2010, as in view of the instructions of RBI prevailing at that time, he was not supposed to attend the meeting. This witness and another witness, Mrs.V R Iyer, had visited Tanzania to conduct a survey and explore the possibility of opening a Branch. He stated that he met Shri Gagan Gupta, the Director of M/s Kamal Alloys Ltd. in Tanzania. He doubted whether M/s Kamal Alloys Ltd could generate funds to set up a plant on the company's marshy land. But the witness agreed that he did not submit a report to that effect.

--- JUDGMENT 144 ---
V.R. Iyer, who was the Executive Director of the Bank, in her statement stated that the Bank could have been more prudent in doing the due diligence of the foreign entity. 13. We find that the Loan Advisory Committee's favourable recommendations regarding the Company's proposal are also Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 9 of 11on record, apart from the memorandum submitted to the Management Committee. We have also seen the Executive Brief prepared containing the proposal. 14. After perusing the entire material and taking it as correct, perhaps the only material that creates suspicion is the speed with which the proposal of the Company was sanctioned. As far as the respondent is concerned, considering his position and the role ascribed to him in the grant of sanction to the loan proposal of the Company, mere suspicion against him is not enough to frame a charge against him. The proposal had passed through the Loan Advisory Committee which recommended the same. The proposal was placed before the respondent on 10th August 2010. As the credit proposal was beyond the sanctioning authority of the respondent, it was directed to be placed before the Management Committee. Apart from the Loan Clearance Committee, the proposal was approved by the Bank's Chief General Manager (Credit). 15. The respondent's role started with signing the Memorandum after it was approved by the Chief General Manager (Credit) and the Executive Director. A perusal of the Memorandum placed before the respondent for sanction showed that as many as 14 Public Sector Banks were lending to the Company apart from an international private sector bank. The respondent's role was confined to signing the memorandum prepared by the senior officers and participating in the Management Committee meeting, which approved the proposal. No material is placed on record to Criminal Appeal No. 2891 of 2023 Page 10 of 11show that any of the accused other than bank officials ever met the respondent before the sanction of the proposal by the Management Committee. Only because the entire proposal was processed and cleared within a short span of time, no offence is made out against the respondent. Taking the material in the charge sheet as it is, complicity of the respondent is not made out. 16. Therefore, we see no scope to interfere with the impugned order. While we say so, we must observe here that we have examined only the role ascribed to the respondent in the process of sanctioning the facilities to the Company. We have examined the charge sheet only for that limited purpose. Therefore, any observation made in the judgment will not affect the trial against the other accused persons as we have not recorded any findings about the material against them. 17. Subject to what is stated above, the appeal is dismissed. ...…………………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 145 ---
... RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T SANJAY KAROL J. Leave to Appeal is granted. 2. Questioned in these appeals are three judgements of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana passed in CR No. 4418 of 2012 (O & M) dated 6th May 2015 and 16th September 2015 along with RA-CR No. 265-CII of 2015 in CR No. 4418 of 2012, dated 20th November 2015. The orders in civil revision (dated 6th May and 16th September 2015) were interim and final, respectively, dismissing such a revision against order and judgment dated 17th January 2012 of the Additional District Judge, Moga, which allowed the appeal against the order and judgment dated 17th January 2009 of the Civil Judge, Junior Division 1-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016who had allowed the objections taken by the Appellants herein in the execution petition filed to enforce the final decree in Civil Suit No. 266 of 1987. BACKGROUND OF THE INSTANT DISPUTE 3. Although the bone of contention before this court relates to execution proceedings and the objections taken therein, the factual milieu in which the controversy has come to stand, as it does today, is important for the purpose of disposal of these appeals. 3.1 Civil Suit No.66 of 19791 was filed by Mukand Singh (father of the Appellant, now represented by LRs) and Chanan Singh against a total of thirty- three persons, including Dr. Thakar Singh (father of the Respondent 1 & 2) and LRs of Nand Singh, seeking declaration and separate possession of a half share of the land in Khasra No.6363, Khatauni No.7257 and Khasra No.2259 (measuring 2 Kanals - 18 Marlas). Out of the thirty-three defendants only two, namely, Dr. Thakar Singh and one Karamjit Singh were represented, while others remained ex-parte. The suit was decreed and the plaintiffs were declared owners and possessors of half share of the above property. An appeal was filed thereagainst, but the same came to be dismissed vide order and judgment dated 18th October 1982. In pursuance thereof, a warrant of possession in favour of Mukand Singh was issued on 21st September 1985. 1 First Partition Suit 2-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016The dispute before this court pertains only to Khasra No.2259 (2 Kanals - 18 Marlas), which is part of Schedule ‘D’ properties described in the plaint. 3.2 Subsequently in 1987, Dr Thakar filed Civil Suit No.2662 against the LRs Nand Singh and approximately seventy other defendants, for his individual one- fourth share of 58 marlas (Khasra No.2259). It is to be noted that plaintiffs in the first partition suit were defendants in this second partition suit, which included Mukand Singh, the father of Joginder Singh (now represented through LRs). The Additional Senior Sub-Judge, First Class, Moga, framed the following issues :- 1. Whether the plaintiff is owner to the extent of share in the property as detailed in the head note of the plaint? OPP 2. Whether suit is not maintainable? OPD 3. Whether suit is not properly valued for court fees and jurisdiction? OPD 4. Whether suit is bad for misjoinder of parties? OPD 5. Whether plaintiff is entitled to the decree of possession as prayed for? OPP 6. Relief. For Issues 1 and 5, the learned civil court held that “the plaintiff is owner in possession as co-sharer to the extent of share as mentioned and detailed in Schedule ABCD in the headnote and as such he is entitled to the decree in possession by way of partition. Accordingly, I decide both these issues in favour 2 Second Partition Suit 3-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016of the plaintiff and against the defendants.” Similarly, Issues 2, 3 and 4 were also decided in favour of the plaintiff, and the suit was accordingly decreed with costs. In a subsequent application, the learned civil court appointed a local commissioner. The first report came on 15th December 1996, and an additional report was submitted on 25th October 1997. 3.3 On 4th February, 1998, a final decree was drawn up in the above suit with only one respondent, namely, Karamjit Singh being represented and others ex- parte. In respect of the contested portion, the final decree records “…Properties shown in headnote ‘D’ of the plaint be partitioned as suggested by local commissioner and possession of khasra nos. 2258/1 and 2258/2 as shown be letters A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.J.K.L.M., and possession of Kh.o.2259 as shown by letters N.O.P.Q, in the site plan Annexure LC-VI be delivered to the plaintiffs- applicants.”. On 25th January 2002, the Respondents herein, i.e., the decree holders filed an execution petition. 3.4 The present appellant, now represented by LRs (son of Mukand Singh) filed objections to the execution petition on 25th January, 2002, under Order XXI Rule 58, 97 r/w Section 47 and 151 of the Code Civil Procedure, 19083. Objections to the Execution 4. The objections so filed4 are reproduced below for reference: “The objector most respectfully submits as under :- 3 Hereinafter referred to as ‘CPC’ 4 Annexure P-6 4-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 20161. That the above noted execution is pending in this Hon’ble Court and is fixed for today.

--- JUDGMENT 146 ---
2. That in the instant execution apart from other property, property bearing Khasra no.2259 (2 Kanals-18 Marlas) is also the subject matter. 3. That the above said execution application is not maintainable against the property bearing khasra Nos.2259/1 (1-6), 2259/2 (0-4), 2259/3 (0-12), 2259/1 (0-16) as entered in the jamabandi for 1997-98, which is owned and possessed by the objector. 4. That the above said execution is liable to be dismissed - qua the property duly shown in the site plan, which is part of khasra nos.2259/1, 2259/2, 2259/1 for the reasons noted below :- i. That the property measuring 14.60 marlas which is part of khasra no.2259 is owned and possessed by the objector since 25.5.1989 by virtue of civil court decree passed in civil suit no.107-1 of 27.4.1989 decided on 25.5.1989 by the court of the then Additional Senior Sub Judge Moga. Since then the objector is the owner in possession of 14.60 marlas out of khasra no.2259 and he has raised huge construction on it by spending more than Rs.15.0 lacs. After construction, the objection has rented out parts of the premises constructed on khasra no.2259 to different persons and in same portion, he himself is in possession. ii. That vide warrants of possession dated 8.9.85 passed in execution No.116-10 of 12.5.84 by the court of Shri B.C. Rajput, P.C.S., the then Additional Senior Sub Judge Moga, 14.60 marlas out of this property was given in possession to father of the objector i.e. Mukand Singh. iii. That father of objector Shri Mukand Singh died in the year of 1993 and he used to reside along with the objector at Ludhiana since 1965 and as such no proper service either of the objector or his father was ever got effected by the decree holders. Rather the decree holders have mis-guided the honourable court as he was very well within his knowledge that Mukand Singh had died in the year of 1993 and he is residing at Ludhiana. Further more since 1989, the objector is the owner in possession of the property in question and this fact is in the knowledge of the decree holder and his Legal representatives, but with ulterior motive, neither the decree holder Thakur Singh nor his L/Rs ever informed or brought to the notice of the court that the property described & shown in the site plan, which is part of khasra No.2259 is owned and possessed by the objector and by misguiding the honourable court, got the property into their shares, which was owned and possessed by the objector. iv. That the objector had no knowledge regarding the pendency of the litigation regarding the property in dispute, as he had no occasion to know the same, as the decree holder willfully and with ulterior motive, kept the honourable court in dark regarding the possession and ownership of the objector. Had the decree holder brought the fact regarding ownership and possession of the objector over the property 5-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016in dispute, the Honourable court must have called the objectors. Even in law, the objector was a necessary party, as he was got title in the property, which is the subject matter of the property, which is under execution in the instant petition. v. That the objector is a bonafide transferee of the property in dispute vide civil court decree detailed and described above. Mutation no.6016 on the basis of above said decree was also entered and sanctioned in his favour. Even in revenue record, name of the objector is clearly, mentioned, but with ulterior motive, the decree holder has not brought the revenue record before the Honourable court, so that truth should not come to the knowledge of the court. Under the garb of the orders of the Hon’ble Court and by concealment, the decree holder might get the possession of the property, which is duly shown in the attached site plan and which bears khasra Nos.2259/1 etc. as detailed above.

--- JUDGMENT 147 ---
vi. That Varinderjit Gill d/o Dr. Thakur Singh filed an injunction suit against the objector and his son Manprit Singh, which is also pending in this Hon’ble Court. Son of the objector is not residing with him and is living separately at Moga, as he is not on good terms with the objector. Son of the objector told the objector on 22.1.2002 regarding the fact that he has received the summons from this Honourable court. After inquiry it came to the notice of the objector regarding pendency of injunction suit and from the plaint of the injunction suit, the objector came to know regarding the passing of the final decree dated 4.2.1998 and the preliminary decree regarding the property in dispute and he was stunned to know that by frustrating the provisions of law and by concealment, the decree holder was going to cause a huge irreparable loss to him by misguiding the Honourable Court. vii. That it is mentioned here that father of the objector and the objector himself left Moga in the year 1979 and since then, they are permanently residing at Ludhiana. It is not understood that how the service of the objector or his father was got effected. As a matter of fact, neither the objector nor his father ever received any service nor they ever refused to accept the service from the Hon’ble Court. It seems that the D.H. by mis-guiding the Hon’ble Court and concealment, got the ex-parte decree against father of the objector, although after 25.9.1989 the objector became the owner in possession of 14.6 marlas of the property. 5. That both in law & equity the property described in the site plan & of which the objector was made owner in possession vide judgment & decree dt. 25.5.1989 is not liable to any execution of any final decree dt. 4.2.98 or any preliminary decree, as the objector was not party in the same and he was neither served nor summoned. The objector as Legal heir of his father Mukand Singh will file appropriate application for setting aside the final decree & pre-decree. 6. That the D.Hs are stopped by their act & conduct & on the principle of acquisance to file execution reg: the property shown in the site plan, 6-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016as D.Hs have been seen the objector raising the construction, but never objected them. 7. That cause of action arose to the objector on 22.1.2002 his son Manprit Singh talked to him reg: pendency of the injunction suit. 8. That the property is situated within the jurisdiction of this Hon’ble Court. 9. Hence it is prayed that the objection petition may kindly be accepted and the instant execution be dismissed qua 14.60 marlas of the property duly shown in the attached site plan, which is owned and possessed by the objector & in which the D.Hs have got no right, title or interest.”" 5. A response to objections was filed on 22nd March, 20025, where preliminary objections of locus standi and maintainability were taken. The said objections are extracted in toto, as under:- “It is respectfully submitted as under :- Preliminary Objections :- 1. That the objector has no locus standi to file objections. 2. The objections as framed are not maintainable. On Merits :- 1. Para No.1 needs no reply 2. Para No.2 is matter of record. 3. Para No.3 is wrong & denied. It is wrong and denied that Khasra No.2259/1 to 2259/3 & 2259/1 as alleged is owned by objector. The total area of these Khasra numbers comes to 2K-18M. The objector in Para No.4(1) below claims 14 ½ marlas on the basis of Civil Court Decree, but in this para claims the whole. The objector cannot blow hot & cold. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 148 ---
Para no.4 is wrong and denied. (i) This sub para is wrong and denied, the perusal of decree (Final shows that D.H. is claiming 1q/4 share in Khasra No.2259. The ¼ share comes to 14 ½ Marlas meaning thereby that whole of Khasra No.2259 is not claimed by the D.H. It is wrong & denied that objector has any right, title or interest in the portion of Khasra No.2259 allotted 5 Annexure P-7 7-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016to D.H. in partition proceeds through civil court. Moreover Mukand Singh was very much a party to the Civil Court Decree. (ii) Sub Para (ii) is wrong and denied. (iii) Sub Para (iii) is wrong and denied. It is wrong & denied that there was no proper service as alleged of Mukand Singh. Plaintiff filed suit on 11-06-87 which was decreed by way of preliminary decree on 15-10-90. Final decree proceedings initiated on 26-3-91 became final on 4-2-98. The objector has no right, title or interest in the property allotted to D.H. out of Khasra No.2259. (iv) Sub Para (iv) is wrong and denied. Detailed reply has been given above. (v) Sub Para (v) is wrong and denied. Detailed reply has been given above. (vi) This sub para is wrong & denied as alleged. Pendency of injunction suit is admitted. The very objector is a party to the said suit. It is wrong & denied the objector learnt about the suit on 22-1- 2002 as alleged. Nothing has been concealed by D.H. (vii) This sub para is wrong & denied. In Sub para (iii) above 1965 is the alleged year & this sub para 1979 is the alleged year of departure from Moga and whereas the alleged Civil Court Decree is dated 27-04-89. The fact is that neither the objector nor his father ever left Moga & reside at Moga. Service was effect in according with law. 5. Para No.5 is wrong and denied. 6. Para No.6 is wrong and denied. 7. Para No.7 is wrong and denied. 8. Para No.8 is wrong and denied. 9. Para No.9 is wrong and denied. It is, therefore, prayed that the objection petition may kindly be dismissed with costs.” 6. The Civil Judge, Junior Division, found the objections raised fully maintainable. A perusal of the said judgment and order reveals the following reasons for such a conclusion- (i) The objector (appellant herein) is a co-sharer in the property, having one-fourth share thereof. The decree holder does not have a better title than the objector; 8-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016(ii) It was held that if the decree holder is entitled to get his share, the objector shares such entitlement. The decree only qua the shares of the decree holder is non-executable without determination of shares of the other parties and as such, modification of the decree is required. (iii) On the aspect of maintainability it was observed that since the objector is a co-sharer, he possesses the requisite locus standi to file objections. (iv) The submission of the decree holder in regard to the maintainability of the objections was dismissed by the learned Judge having observed that the principle of res judicata does not apply to execution proceedings. 7. An appeal against such a finding was filed before the Additional District Judge, Moga, as Civil Misc. Appeal RT No.105/27.05.2011, which was allowed vide Order dated 17th January 2012. The reasoning therefor may be summarized as under:- (i) No fault can be found with the preliminary decree on the ground that the learned Civil Court did not decide the shares of the remaining parties at the time of passing of the decree. (ii) Reliance was placed on the well-recognized principle that the executing court cannot go behind the decree nor can it modify the same. Modification can only be carried out by the court which passed the decree. (iii) If there was any defect in service to the predecessor-in-interest of the objector, such ground should have been raised in modification of the decree in appeal, however, such recourse was not taken and instead he filed objections to the execution. 9-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016(iv) Relying on Usha Sinha v. Dina Sinha6 it was held that per the doctrine of lis pendens, the objector was bound by the decree under execution. Lis pendens on its own is a notice to the purchaser that he is bound by a decree that may be entered in the pending suit. Given that the property was transferred in the name of the objector by his father, Mukand Singh during the pendecy of the suit, he would be bound by the decree. (v) The objector ought to have raised all objections before the Civil Court by filing an application for setting aside the ex-parte decree against his father and predecessor-in-interest, Mukand Singh and not by filing objections to the execution. 8. Aggrieved by allowing the appeal, the High Court was approached under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. The appellant’s revision petition was dismissed observing that- (i) The objections raised under Order XXI Rule 58 read with Order XXI Rule 97 read with Section 47 of the C.P.C. have to be rejected at the threshold since the latter deals with all issues relating to the subject of execution and cannot adjudicate on individual rights of the persons who are not parties. Order XXI Rule 58 enables third parties to present their claims in relation to the suit. The objector/appellant being the son of the judgment debtor, is not a third party to the suit. (ii) Objection under XXI Rule 97 would have to be discarded by virtue of Order XXI Rule 102 which bars the creation of any obstruction, pendente lite. (iii) If a decision was under Order XXI Rule 58 or 97, an appeal was the only possible remedy, which the objector has utilized. If the 6 (2008) 7 SCC 144 10-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016objection is under Section 47, only revision is maintainable. The case erroneously made its way to the Court of the Additional District Judge because the Executing Court allowed “a meaningless petition to be entertained which contained a reference to inconsistent provisions”. In other words, if Section 47 was taken recourse to as a successor in interest, then a petition under Order XXI Rule 58 or Order XXI Rule 97 could not have been maintained. (iv) The duty of determining the share of each party arises only when such party seeks said determination. The absence of such a prayer does not take away the competence of a Court to uphold a plaintiff’s claim and determination of his share. (v) Having observed thus, the matter was kept pending for the executing court to appoint a local commissioner who was to be the Naib Tehsildar of the concerned district. The remit was to identify the property in Khasra No.2259 and locate 58 Marlas in that Khasra number; assess the nature of construction and the extent of vacant land and draw up a plan accordingly. (vi) The matter was taken up on 16th September, 2015. The relevant portion of the order is extracted : “2. The property inspected and the report submitted to Court by the Naib Tehsildar, Moga would show that there is no vacant space available in 2259/4 except in an extent of 50’x33’ adjoining the Maruti Showroom which is stated to have been sold to yet another sharer. I was only looking for availability of vacant space on the western side for that was the property which was vacant at the time when the suit was instituted. If constructions have come subsequently and the defendant himself has allowed for such constructions to come up after the institution of the suit, he cannot have the benefit of retention of the property unless the property where the construction has come was subsequently allotted to him in the final decree. He had not applied for final decree and the plaintiff has been 11-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016granted the share which is now occupied by the defendant. The final decree must go to the next logical stage of making available the property for recovery of possession and the objection taken by the defendant in relation to the execution of the decree after the final decree was passed cannot be sustained. The Court has the power to demolish the construction, if the petitioner-objector does not voluntarily do so.” 9. Aggrieved by the above findings, revision was preferred thereagainst and by order dated 20th November, 2015, the same was dismissed. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 149 ---
We have heard learned counsel for the parties. The question that arises for our consideration is whether the objections filed by the present appellant, now represented through LRs, are maintainable and warrant interference with the decree of the learned civil court. RELEVANT PROVISIONS AND THE POSITION OF LAW 11. As noticed supra, the objections filed are under Order XXI Rules 58 and 97 read with Section 47 of the C.P.C. It is necessary to avert to the provisions and the position of law settled by this Court prior to proceeding to the merits of the matter. “Section 47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree.— (1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit. (2) ... (3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court. 12-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016[Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and a defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit. Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and (b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree within the meaning of this section.] x x x ORDER XXI Execution of Decrees and Orders Payment under Decree Rule 58 : 58. Adjudication of claims to or objections to attachment of, property.— (1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachment of, any property attached in execution of a decree on the ground that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the claim or objection in accordance with the provisions herein contained: Provided that no such, claim or objection shall be entertained — (a) where, before the claim is preferred or objection is made, the property attached has already been sold; or (b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed. (2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the property attached) arising between the parties to a proceeding or their representatives under this rule and relevant to the adjudication of the claim or objection, shall be determined by the Court dealing with the claim or objection and not by a separate suit. (3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in sub-rule (2), the Court shall, in accordance with such determination,— (a) allow the claim or objection and release the property from attachment either wholly or to such extent as it thinks fit; or (b) disallow the claim or objection; or (c) continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, charge or other interest in favour of any person; or (d) pass such order as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit. (4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon under this rule, order made thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree. 13-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court, under the proviso to sub-rule (I), refuses to entertain it, the party against whom such order is made may institute a suit to establish the right which he claims to the property in dispute; but, subject to the result of such-suit, if any, an order so refusing to entertain the claim or objection shall be conclusive. Resistance of delivery of possession to decree-holder or purchaser Rule 97 : 97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of immovable property.— (1) Where the holder of a decree for the possession of immovable property or the purchaser of any such property sold in execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed by any person in obtaining possession of the property, he may make an application to the Court complaining of such resistance or obstruction. (2) Where any application is made under sub-rule (1), the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application in accordance with the provisions herein contained.” 12. This Court has had occasions to expound on the scope, purpose, and applicability of Section 47, CPC. 12.1 In Deep Chand v. Mohan Lal7, the purpose of execution proceedings was taken note of in the following terms: “5.….the purpose of an execution proceeding is to enable the decree- holder to obtain the fruits of his decree. In case where the language of the decree is capable of two interpretations, one of which assists the decree-holder to obtain the fruits of the decree and the other prevents him from taking the benefits of the decree, the interpretation which assists the decree-holder should be accepted. The execution of the decree should not be made futile on mere technicalities which does not, however, mean that where a decree is incapable of being executed under any provision of law it should, in all cases, be executed notwithstanding such bar or prohibition. A rational approach is necessitated keeping in view the prolonged factum of litigation resulting in the passing of a decree in favour of a litigant. The policy of law is to give a fair and liberal and not a technical construction enabling the decree-holder to reap the fruits of his decree.” 7 (2000) 6 SCC 259 14-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016The observations in Rahul S. Shah v. Jinendra Kumar Gandhi & Ors.8 by a Bench of three learned Judges in this regard are also educative. The scope of the section is recognized as:- “24. In respect of execution of a decree, Section 47 CPC contemplates adjudication of limited nature of issues relating to execution i.e. discharge or satisfaction of the decree and is aligned with the consequential provisions of Order 21 CPC. Section 47 is intended to prevent multiplicity of suits. It simply lays down the procedure and the form whereby the court reaches a decision. For the applicability of the section, two essential requisites have to be kept in mind. Firstly, the question must be the one arising between the parties and secondly, the dispute relates to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree. Thus, the objective of Section 47 is to prevent unwanted litigation and dispose of all objections as expeditiously as possible. 25. These provisions contemplate that for execution of decrees, executing court must not go beyond the decree. However, there is steady rise of proceedings akin to a retrial at the time of execution causing failure of realisation of fruits of decree and relief which the party seeks from the courts despite there being a decree in their favour. Experience has shown that various objections are filed before the executing court and the decree-holder is deprived of the fruits of the litigation and the judgment-debtor, in abuse of process of law, is allowed to benefit from the subject-matter which he is otherwise not entitled to.” 12.2 It is all too well-settled that a Court cannot ‘go behind’ a decree. Reference may be made to Rajasthan Financial Corpn.

--- JUDGMENT 150 ---
Man Industrial Corpn. Ltd.9; SBI v. Indexport Registered10; J&K Bank Ltd. v. Jagdish C. Gupta11; and Rajasthan Udyog v. Hindustan Engg. & Industries Ltd.12 8 (2021) 6 SCC 418 9 (2003) 7 SCC 522 10 (1992) 3 SCC 159 11 (2004) 10 SCC 568 12 (2020) 6 SCC 660 15-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201612.3 In Sushil Kumar Mehta v. Gobind Ram Bohra13, it has been held that if a decree is passed by a competent court after due adjudication of merits, it operates as re judicata. If the same is nullity, its validity can be questioned at any stage. It was observed: “26. Thus it is settled law that normally a decree passed by a court of competent jurisdiction, after adjudication on merits of the rights of the parties, operates as res judicata in a subsequent suit or proceedings and binds the parties or the persons claiming right, title or interest from the parties. Its validity should be assailed only in an appeal or revision as the case may be. In subsequent proceedings its validity cannot be questioned. A decree passed by a court without jurisdiction over the subject matter or on other grounds which goes to the root of its exercise or jurisdiction, lacks inherent jurisdiction. It is a coram non judice. A decree passed by such a court is a nullity and is non est. Its invalidity can be set up whenever it is sought to be enforced or is acted upon as a foundation for a right, even at the stage of execution or in collateral proceedings. The defect of jurisdiction strikes at the authority of the court to pass a decree which cannot be cured by consent or waiver of the party. If the court has jurisdiction but there is defect in its exercise which does not go to the root of its authority, such a defect like pecuniary or territorial could be waived by the party. They could be corrected by way of appropriate plea at its inception or in appellate or revisional forums, provided law permits. The doctrine of res judicata under Section 11 CPC is founded on public policy. An issue of fact or law or mixed question of fact and law, which are in issue in an earlier suit or might and ought to be raised between the same parties or persons claiming under them and was adjudicated or allowed uncontested becomes final and binds the parties or persons claiming under them. Thus the decision of a competent court over the matter in issue may operate as res judicata in subsequent suit or proceedings or in other proceedings between the same parties and those claiming under them. (Emphasis Supplied) This was followed/referred in Sabitri Dei v. Sarat Chandra Rout14, Jamia Masjid v. K.V.

--- JUDGMENT 151 ---
Rudrappa15. 13 (1990) 1 SCC 193 14(1996) 3 SCC 301 15 (2022) 9 SCC 225 16-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201612.4 The executing court is to determine all questions inter se the parties to the decree, as flows from the statutory text, have been reiterated in Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd.16 by SR Das, J. (as his Lordship the then was) in the following terms - “Section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code does require that the executing court alone must determine all questions arising between the parties or their representatives and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree and authorises it even to treat the proceedings as a suit.” Similar observations have been made by Vivian Bose, J. in Jai Narain Ram Lundia v. Kedar Nath Khetan17 as follows - “23. The only question that remains is whether the executing court can consider whether the defendant is in a position to perform his part of the decree. But of course it can. If the executing court cannot consider this question who can? The executing court has to see that the defendant gives the plaintiff the very thing that the decree directs and not something else, so if there is any dispute about its identity or substance nobody but the court executing the decree can determine it. It is a matter distinctly relating to the execution, discharge and satisfaction of the decree and so under Section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code, it can only be determined by the court executing the decree...” 12.5 An executing court is to execute the decree as it stands and cannot modify its terms. It has been so held in C.F.

--- JUDGMENT 152 ---
Angadi v. Y.S. Hirannayya18. The relevant extract is as under: “10. A Court executing the decree shall execute it as it stands. It cannot modify or vary the terms of the decree. No exception can be taken to that general principle. But the execution court has the right to construe a decree in the light of the applicable provisions of law and if in this case on a construction of the decree in the light of the 16 1955 SCC OnLine SC 26 17 1956 SCC OnLine SC 50 18 (1972) 1 SCC 191 17-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016applicable provision of law, it found that the deposit made by the respondent on January 2, 1960, was according to law a deposit in compliance with the terms of the decree, then the execution Court was not varying the terms of the decree but executing the decree as it stood after considering the effect of the deposit in the light of the relevant law.” [See also: Deepa Bhargava & Anr. v. Mahesh Bhargava & Ors.19] 12.6 A decree passed by a Court not having the jurisdiction to do so, does not ipso facto, render it illegal. The recourse is for the aggrieved to have it set aside as per law. If they fail to do so, they shall be bound thereby. In Rafique Bibi v.

--- JUDGMENT 153 ---
Syed Waliuddin20 it was held: “8. A distinction exists between a decree passed by a court having no jurisdiction and consequently being a nullity and not executable and a decree of the court which is merely illegal or not passed in accordance with the procedure laid down by law. A decree suffering from illegality or irregularity of procedure, cannot be termed inexecutable by the executing court; the remedy of a person aggrieved by such a decree is to have it set aside in a duly constituted legal proceedings or by a superior court failing which he must obey the command of the decree. A decree passed by a court of competent jurisdiction cannot be denuded of its efficacy by any collateral attack or in incidental proceedings.” The view taken herein was affirmed by a Bench of three judges in Balvant N. Viswamitra v. Yadav Sadashiv Mule21, and followed recently, in Asma Lateef v. Shabbir Ahmad22. 12.7 Execution petition dismissed for default of the decree-holder does not operate as res judicata qua “further execution of the decree.” Shivashankar Prasad Shah v. Baikunth Nath Singh23 records the position of law as below:- 19 (2009) 2 SCC 294 20 (2004) 1 SCC 287 21 (2004) 8 SCC 706 22 (2024) 4 SCC 696 18-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016“6. The courts in India have generally taken the view that an execution petition which has been dismissed for the default of the decree-holder though by the time that petition came to be dismissed, the judgment- debtor had resisted the execution on one or more grounds, does not bar the further execution of the decree in pursuance of fresh execution petitions filed in accordance with law — see Lakshmibai Anant Kondkar v. Rayji Bhikaji Kondkar [XXXI, BLR 400] . Even the dismissal for default of objections raised under Section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code does not operate as res judicata when the same objections are raised again in the course of the execution—see Bahir Das Pal v. Girish Chandra Pal [AIR 1923 Cal 287] ; Bhagwati Prasad Sah v.

--- JUDGMENT 154 ---
Ravindra Balkrishna Patel24. 12.8 In landlord-tenant disputes, writ petitions cannot be entertained when the executing court is seized of applications seeking setting aside of decree of eviction and order of possession. This Court in Hameed Kunju v. Nazim25 held- “26. In any case, in our considered view, the executing court having seized of the applications filed by the respondent, there was no justification on the part of the High Court to have entertained the writ petition and decided them like an original court. All that the High Court, in such circumstances, could do was to request the executing court to dispose of the pending applications (IAs) filed by the respondent on their respective merits leaving the parties to challenge the orders once passed on such applications by filing appeal, before the appellate authorities. It was, however, not done.” 23 (1969) 1 SCC 718 24 (2022) 14 SCC 417 25 (2017) 8 SCC 611 19-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201612.9 In scenarios where a compromise decree is entered into between the parties, the question to be asked is whether the Court whose duty it is to execute the decree is the one to have recorded the compromise. The following discussion made in Lakshmi Narayanan v.

--- JUDGMENT 155 ---
v. Thakurain Bind Basni Kuer [(1938-39) 66 IA 84 : AIR 1939 PC 80] laid down the law on the subject as follows: “If it appears to the court, acting under Section 47, that the true effect of the agreement was to discharge the decree forthwith in consideration of certain promises by the debtor, then no doubt the court will not have occasion to enforce the agreement in execution proceedings, but will leave the creditor to bring a separate suit upon the contract. If, on the other hand, the agreement is intended to govern the liability of the debtor under the decree and to have effect upon the time or manner of its enforcement, it is a matter to be dealt with under Section 47. In such a case to say that the creditor may perhaps have a separate suit is to misread the Code, which by requiring all such matters to be dealt with in execution discloses a broader view of the scope and functions of an executing court. Their Lordships are in agreement with the statement in the case of Gobardhan Das [Gobardhan Das v. Dau Dayal, ILR (1932) 54 All 573 : AIR 1932 All 273] that ‘in numerous cases a compromise between the decree-holder and the judgment-debtor entered into in the course of execution proceedings, which was duly recorded, has been enforced’ and they are not of opinion that the practice, which is both widespread and inveterate, is contrary to the Code. They are of opinion that in the present case the compromises can and should be enforced in these execution proceedings.” 14. In a case where parties compromise after the decree in a case has been passed, the effect of the compromise on the executability of the 26 (2000) 7 SCC 240 20-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016decree depends upon the intention of the parties, which is a mixed question of law and fact and has to be determined by the executing court on an application under Section 47 CPC on interpretation of the decree and the compromise in the light of the facts and circumstances of each case. If on such determination it is gathered that the intention of the parties is to extinguish the decree and either the decree-holder or the judgment-debtor got the compromise recorded under Rule 2 of Order 21 CPC by the court whose duty it is to execute the decree, the execution of the decree cannot be proceeded with by the executing court. But if the intention of the parties is to keep the decree alive and to give effect to it in the manner agreed upon between the parties in the compromise, the decree will be given effect to accordingly or executed as it is depending upon whether the compromise is recorded by the court as aforementioned or not.” (Emphasis Supplied) 13. Having considered the application of Section 47 CPC, as above, let us now turn to the present facts. The High Court, in our view, has correctly held that the objector-appellant is not a third party to the dispute. The objections brought by him can rightly be considered under this section. In order to properly appreciate the genesis of the objections, let us take an example. A suit is filed by ‘A’ and ‘A1 ’ for half share of the piece of land owned jointly by them with others such as ‘B’. In time, the suit is decreed and ‘A’ and ‘A1’ are declared owners and possessors of said half of the property. Further down in time, a 2nd suit comes to be filed by ‘B’ against ‘C’ and others, including ‘A’ and ‘A1’, seeking one-fourth share of the very same piece of land, which was the subject matter of the suit filed earlier by ‘A’. The suit was accordingly decreed granting him rights over one fourth share in the property. Objections come to be filed by the successors in interest of A, stating that the very same piece of land granted to their forebears by the earlier suit, now stands granted to ‘B’. 21-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201614. We have already noted above that the dispute, which has travelled up to this Court, pertains to the execution of decree of the second partition suit. The share sought to be divided was a result of the first partition suit. Let us, therefore, understand the import of the first suit. The prayer made thereunder, is reproduced below: “Suit for declaration to the effect that plaintiffs are owners of ½ share of the land measuring Khasra No.6363 Khatauni No. 7257, Khasra No.2259 (2 Kanals-18Marlas) as entered in Jamabandi 1969-70 situated at Moga Mehla Singh and entitled to separate possession of ½ share of the land in question and possession by land in dispute way of consequential relief or to any other relief to which the plaintiffs are entitled.” The Court on 22nd September, 1979 decreed the suit in favour of the Plaintiffs in the following terms. “As a result of my findings on the above issues, I decree the suit of the Plaintiffs for a declaration that there are the owners of half share of the suit land and for possession. The defendants will also bear the costs of the suit.” For clarity, it is mentioned that Mukand Singh, father of the objector/appellant herein was the plaintiff in the said suit. An appeal titled ‘Civil Appeal No.16-II of 1982, Dr. Thakar Singh v Mukand Singh & Ors.’ was filed before the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, which was dismissed as meritless vide judgment dated 18.10.1982. Handing over of possession was recorded by Additional Senior Sub-Judge, Moga, on 21st September, 1985 to the LRs of Mukand Singh and Chanan Singh. 22-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016Copy of Nazir Report In the Court of Sh. B.C. Rajput, PCS, Addl. Senior Sub Judge, Moga. Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 156 ---
No. 116-10of 05/12.84 Decided on: 21.09.85 Mukand Singh S/o Lal Singh, Chaman Singh deceased represented by Smt. Parakash Kaur, window, Parvinder Kaur, & Jatinder Kaur daughter of Chaman Singh rs/of Moga. Vs. Lakhminder Singh S/o Bachan Singh & Ors. Sir, On spot, after demarcation possession of land measuring half of the 58 Marlas i.e. 29 Marlas given to decree holder. On the sport 14 1/2 marlas of land towards each side of the property of Dwarka Dass and 14 ½ marlas of land towards his west side has been given to Jatinder Kaur, Parvinder Kaur, Smt. Parkash Kaur and sons of Mukund Singh decree holder. I did not face any difficulty and during the process, munadi was conducted and munadi fee was taken charged from the decree holder. Report is presented. “Amar Nath N.N. 8.9.85 Sd/- Decree holder 1. Smt. Parkash Kaur wd/o Chanan Singh 2. Parvinder Kaur D/o Chanan Singh; 3. Jatinder Kaur D/o Chanan Singh; 4. Joginder Singh Sodhi S/o Mukand Singh, all residents of Moga. Witnesses: 5. Matinder Singh S/o Banta Singh (Witness) 6. Sh. Rupinder Singh S/o Nazar Singh (Witness) 7. Sh. Sarawant Singh Arora S/o Dayal Singh (Witness) Sir, possession given. Sd/- dated 20.08.85 15. To put the grievance of the objector in context, it is that the lands decreed in second partition suit included Khasra No.2259 and in the execution, it is that part of the land that he received from his father Mukand Singh, which has been shown as belonging to the decree holders-respondents herein. 23-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201616. With the appeal before the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, being dismissed, the decree of 1979 in the first partition suit has attained finality. Therefore, the remit of the second partition suit necessarily has to exclude the portions which already stand decreed per the first partition suit. As already noticed above, by virtue of the first partition decree, the legal representatives of Mukand Singh and Chanan Singh have been in possession of the decreed lands since 21st September, 1985. Any decision qua Khasra No.2259 taken in the second partition suit has to protect the property as allotted to the legal representatives of the above-named persons. The Trial Court in its judgment dated 15th October, 1990 records that ‘as regards khasra no.2259 and 2262 plaintiff alongwith Nand Singh are owners in possession of 1/2 share (1/4 share each) out of these Khasra numbers…’. It is evident from the above that Thakkar Singh and Nand Singh both acknowledged that their rights extended only to half the share of Khasra No.2259. 17. It is unclear from the record as to whether the portion of Khasra No.2259 styled ‘NOPQ’ by the final decree is the very same plot of land granted to the LRs of Mukand Singh by the warrant of possession dated 21st September 1985, or not. Till and such time a clear determination in this regard is made, this dispute cannot be put to rest since there is no dispute as to the entitlement of one-fourth share. It is only, what part of the land constitutes the respective one- fourth share which has led to the present judgment being passed. The respondents herein have alleged that the warrant of possession is a ‘self prepared 24-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016document’ and ‘not genuine’ since there was no demarcation of shares. Both these questions are not for this Court to decide.

--- JUDGMENT 157 ---
18. The impugned orders of the High Court dismissing the revision application are to be interfered with, for that instance, the procedure has managed to compromise the substantive right of the objector. The ground taken by the High Court to dismiss the revision application is that the appellant herein misapplied the provisions in filing his objections before the executing court, inasmuch as the objection petition mentioned both Section 47 as also Order XXI Rule 58 and 97 of the CPC. The High Court found that both these sets of provisions could not be applied together given that the method of assailing the orders passed therein are different and cannot co-exist. Whilst looking at it purely from a procedural point of view, this may have some merit; however, as has been long established, procedural irregularity cannot defeat substantive rights or cannot subvert substantive justice. Since the objector or his father already had a decree in their favour, fruits thereof cannot be denied to them by virtue of the fact that while attempting to protect their rights in a subsequent suit which would have affected their enjoyment of such property, the Sections or Orders under which they sought such protection, were incorrect. 25-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 201619. This Court cannot help but be reminded of the famous saying that procedure is the handmaiden of justice. This Court in Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal v. National Building Material Supply, Gurgaon27 : “5. …. Rules of procedure are intended to be a handmaid to the administration of justice. A party cannot be refused just relief merely because of some mistake, negligence, inadvertence or even infraction of the Rules of procedure.” We also find support for our conclusion in the judgment of this Court passed in Uday Shankar Triyar v. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh and Another28 : “17. Non-compliance with any procedural requirement relating to a pleading, memorandum of appeal or application or petition for relief should not entail automatic dismissal or rejection, unless the relevant statute or rule so mandates. Procedural defects and irregularities which are curable should not be allowed to defeat substantive rights or to cause injustice. Procedure, a handmaiden to justice, should never be made a tool to deny justice or perpetuate injustice, by any oppressive or punitive use. The well-recognised exceptions to this principle are: (i) where the statute prescribing the procedure, also prescribes specifically the consequence of noncompliance; (ii) where the procedural defect is not rectified, even after it is pointed out and due opportunity is given for rectifying it; (iii) where the non-compliance or violation is proved to be deliberate or mischievous; (iv) where the rectification of defect would affect the case on merits or will affect the jurisdiction of the court; (v) in case of memorandum of appeal, there is complete absence of authority and the appeal is presented without the knowledge, consent and authority of the appellant.” 20. Further, The High Court with respect to the first partition suit, observed that it could not have been decreed by virtue of the Punjab Pre-Emption (Repeal) 27 (1969) 1 SCC 869 28 (2006) 1 SCC 75 26-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016Act, 1973, but then noted that this is not an aspect which requires delineation given that the entitlement of share is admitted by the parties. Be that as it may. We find the said observation to be in error for the reason that the discussion of pre-emption in the judgment rendered in the first partition suit appears to correspond to an earlier transaction having taken place somewhere in the 1930s and 1940s by one Lal Singh, father of the plaintiffs in the first partition suit. 21. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the matter is remanded to the First Appellate Court to take a decision on the objections of the appellant afresh, on merits. It stands clarified that this Court has not expressed any view on the facts of the case. Considering the fact that this matter has been doing the rounds of various Court halls for more than two decades, we request the concerned Court to take all steps necessary for expeditious disposal. After all it was as far back as 1872 that the Privy Council in General Manager of the Raj Durbhunga v. Coomar Ramaput Sing29 lamented that the problems of the litigant in India, begin once he has obtained the decree. In Messer Griesheim GmbH v. Goyal MG Gases Pvt Ltd.30 a hundred and fifty years later this Court observed that ‘there has been no improvement and still the decree holder faces the same problem what was being faced in the past.’ When a litigant approaches the Court, what he is interested in getting is not the imprimatur of the Court on his right over a certain amount of money or in this case property, what he actually 29 (1871-72) 14 MIA 605:20 ER 912 30 (2022) 11 SCC 549 27-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016wants is the actual money and/or property, and the rights that flow from possessing it, i.e., enjoyment of the same in whatever manner he sees fit. Needless to add, it shall be open to any party to the instant lis to approach this Court subsequent to the disposal, should the need so arise.

--- JUDGMENT 158 ---
FIR No. 03/13 was registered on 28.05.2013 at Police Station Jashpur under Sections 376 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short, the “IPC”). The appellant is the principal accused. His father was also named as accused of threatening the victim with dire consequences if she would not withdraw the complaint. The Trial Court framed charges under Sections 376(1) and 506 of the IPC against the appellant, in 2013. The Sessions trial was conducted and the final hearing 1was also concluded. The learned Additional Session’s Judge, vide order dated 28.04.2015, adjourned the case for 30.04.2015 for pronouncement of judgment. The appellant was held guilty and convicted vide judgment pronounced on 30.04.2015. 4. Before he could be heard on the quantum of the sentence, the appellant moved an application on 30.04.2015 under Section 317 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short, the “CrPC”) to exempt him from personal appearance on the ground that he had met with an accident. In view of that application, the matter was adjourned on a few occasions to enable the appellant to recover from the accident. 5. In the meanwhile, the Presiding Officer of the Court, namely, Mr. J.

--- JUDGMENT 159 ---
R. Banjara, who had convicted the appellant, was transferred between 04.05.2015 and 15.05.2015. A new Presiding Officer, namely, Mr. Mohammad Rizwan Khan was posted in his place. 6. After that, the appellant approached the High Court seeking a direction to the new Presiding Officer to re-hear the case, including on the question of conviction. He relied upon Sections 353 and 354 of the CrPC It was contended that the new Presiding Officer was obligated not only to hear the appellant on the question of sentence but also on the point of conviction in terms of the above-mentioned provisions. The High Court, vide interim order dated 19.06.2015, stayed the proceedings before the Trial Court. Finally, vide the impugned order dated 13.05.2019, the petition filed by the appellant was dismissed, having found that: 2.(i) the judgment of conviction was duly pronounced by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mr. J.R. Ban- jara; and .(ii) there was no illegality in the successor-in-of- fice of the Court of Additional Sessions Judge to hear and determine the quantum of the sentence, even in a case where the judgment of conviction was pro- nounced by his predecessor-in-office. 7. The High Court, consequently, directed the new Presiding Officer to hear the appellant on the question of sentence and pass an appropriate order in terms of Section 235(2) of the CrPC 8. The aggrieved appellant is before us. 9. We have heard learned Senior Counsel/counsel for the parties and perused the record. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 160 ---
Section 235 of the CrPC reads as follows: “Judgment of acquittal or conviction 1. After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall give a judgment in the case. 2. If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 360 hear the accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law.” 11. A plain reading of the provision leaves no room to doubt that a judgment of conviction shall have two components; namely, 3(i) Judgment on the point of conviction; and (ii) Where the accused is convicted, a separate order of sentence to be passed according to law, after hearing the accused on the question of sentence. 12. The aforesaid provision mandates that once the judgment of conviction is delivered, the accused has a right to be heard on the quantum of the sentence. This is so, in view of the well-established principle of law that various relevant factors, including mitigating circumstances, if any, are to be kept in mind by the Court while awarding an adequate and proportionate sentence. 13. It is not in dispute that in deference to Section 235(1) of the CrPC, the appellant was duly heard and a judgment of conviction was recorded and pronounced on 30.04.2015. 14. Consequential thereto, the appellant was entitled to be heard on the question of sentence. Since the appellant himself had been seeking adjournments and exemption from personal appearance due to the injuries suffered by him in a road accident and meanwhile the Presiding Officer had been transferred, it was but natural that the new Presiding Officer was required to hear the appellant on the quantum of the sentence, for faithful compliance with Section 235(2) of the CrPC and then, to pass an appropriate order of sentence. 15. The process and procedure contemplated under 4Section 235(2) of the CrPC cannot annul the judgment of conviction recorded under sub-section (1) thereof. Both clauses operate in their respective fields, though sub-section (2) is contingent upon the outcome under sub-section (1) of Section 235 of the CrPC The occasion to comply with sub- section (2) of Section 235, thus, arises only when there is a judgment of conviction passed under Section 235(1) of the CrPC 16. The contention of the appellant, that with the transfer of the Presiding Officer post his conviction, the new Presiding Officer was obligated to hear him afresh even on the question of conviction, is wholly misconceived and misdirected. Once the judgment dated 30.04.2015 was pronounced, the conviction of the appellant stood finalized within the meaning of Section 235(1) of the CrPC, whereupon the Trial Court became functus officio for the purpose of sub-section (1) of Section 235 of the CrPC The only issue that survived thereafter was of the quantum of sentence for which, the procedure contemplated under sub-section (2) was to be complied with. The High Court has, thus, rightly held that the successor officer would hear the appellant on the question of sentence and pass an appropriate order. We see no legal infirmity in the impugned order passed by the High Court. 17. Learned senior counsel for the appellant vehemently urges that the judgment of conviction, granted against the appellant, does not satisfy the ingredients of Section 353 read with Section 354 of the CrPC and hence, there is no 5`judgment’ rendered in the eyes of law within the meaning of sub-section (1) of Section 235 of the CrPC 18. We are, however, not impressed by the submission. We say so for the reason that the Trial Court delivered a self- speaking judgment of conviction which satisfies all the constituents illustrated in Section 354(1) of the CrPC Further, the operative part of the Judgment as well as the order passed on that very date for granting exemption from personal appearance to the appellant, reveal that the said judgment of conviction was read out by the Presiding Officer in open court, in the presence of the appellant’s counsel, and it was well understood by his pleader. The Presiding Officer thus, followed the procedure envisaged under sub-section (1) of Section 353 of the CrPC The next step to be taken by the Presiding Officer, was to list the case to accord a hearing to the appellant on the quantum of sentence. That is precisely what has been done in the instant case. We are, thus, of the view that there is not even a fragment of violation of Sections 353 or 354 of the CrPC, as claimed on behalf of the appellant. 19. There is thus no merit in this appeal which is consequently dismissed. 20. The Presiding Officer, presently posted in the concerned trial Court, is directed to hear the appellant on the question of sentence as early as possible but not later than one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order. The necessary consequences will follow. 621. The appellant is directed to surrender before the Trial Court on 04.11.2024 at 10.00 a.m. for being taken into judicial custody. He shall be produced before the Trial Court on the date of hearing on the quantum of sentence as also the date of pronouncement of the order on sentence. In case he absents or absconds, the law must take its own course. The Police Authorities are directed to ensure that the appellant remains present before the Court to meet the necessary consequences. 22.

--- JUDGMENT 161 ---
NON-REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 786 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 32406-32407 OF 2017 D.C. MALVIYA (SINCE DECEASED) THR. LRS. … Petitioner(s) VERSUS DR. A.H. MEMON (SINCE DECEASED) THR. LRS. AND OTHERS … Respondent(s) With SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 19478-19479 OF 2019 DR. RAJENDRA BANTHIA AND OTHERS … Petitioner(s) VERSUS D.C. MALVIYA (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. AND OTHERS … Respondent(s) J U D G M E N T Rajesh Bindal, J. 1. This order will dispose of a bunch of petitions as noted above. Page 1 of 92. Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.32406-07 of 2017 have been filed by Legal Representatives (for short “LRs”) of the deceased patient seeking enhancement of compensation awarded on account of alleged medical negligence, whereas Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.19478-79 of 2019 have been filed by the doctors who have been held liable and were directed to pay damages for deficiency in service along with refund of treatment costs. For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to by their positions before the National Commission1. 3. Briefly, the facts available on record are that a complaint2 was filed before the District Forum3 on 01.08.2003, by the predecessor in interest of the petitioners before this Court in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.32406-07 of 2017, seeking compensation of ₹14,00,000/- on account of death of his wife (late Sheela Malviya). The allegations were of medical negligence. She was admitted in the nursing home managed by the deceased respondent No.1 Dr. A.H. Memon, who is now represented by his LRs, for the treatment of Nasal Polyps. On 17.08.2001 (pg.

--- JUDGMENT 162 ---
A.H. Memon’s hospital did not have ventilator facility, she was shifted to the opposite party No. 5, Dr. Rajendra Banthia’s nursing home on the same day. The patient was given treatment for around 19 days at Dr. Rajendra Banthia’s nursing home, however her condition remained critical. On 06.09.2001 (page no. G), she was shifted to opposite party No.6, Dr. Gautam Darda’s hospital where the patient expired on 07.09.2001. 4. The District Forum vide order dated 26.07.2006 dismissed the complaint qua opposite party Nos.1 to 4 and 6 to 8 before it, namely; Dr. A.H. Memon, Dr. M. Arif Memon, Dr. S. Rathi, Dr. Anil Jain, Dr. Aarti Gautam Darda, Dr. Chandrika Sahu and Dr. Atul Tiwari. 5. The complaint was accepted only qua opposite party No.5 namely Dr. Rajendra Banthia. He was directed to refund the entire treatment charges received by him to the tune of ₹1,20,000/-. Additionally, ₹50,000/- was directed to be paid on account of deficiency of service and ₹2,000/- were awarded as legal expenses. The amount was to be paid with interest @ 9% p.a. from 17.08.2001 till realization.

--- JUDGMENT 163 ---
6. Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the complainant namely late Shri D.C. Malviya, husband of the deceased and also the Page 3 of 9opposite party No.5 Dr. Rajendra Banthia against whom compensation was awarded, filed appeals4 before the State Commission5. Both the appeals were dismissed by the State Commission vide order dated 12.10.2009. 7. Still aggrieved, both the aforesaid parties filed Revision Petitions6 before the National Commission. The revision petition filed by late Shri D.C. Malviya represented through his LRs, was allowed to the extent that in addition to the relief already granted by the District Forum, opposite party No.1 through LRs and opposite parties No. 2 to 4 were directed to pay compensation of ₹3,00,000/- jointly and severally to the LRs of the complainant. Opposite party 7 and 8 were directed to pay ₹50,000/- each for giving contradictory CT Scan reports. Cost of ₹20,000/- was also directed to be paid by all opposite parties except opposite party No.6. Opposite party No.5, Dr. Rajendra Banthia was directed to pay compensation as awarded by District Forum. The amount was directed to be paid within four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of the order failing which interest @ 9% p.a. was payable from the date of filing of complaint till the realization. 4 Appeal Number 457 of 2006 and Appeal Number 472 of 2006 5 Chhattisgarh State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Pandri, Raipur. 6 Revision Number 24 of 2010 and Revision Number 382 of 2010 Page 4 of 98. Aggrieved against the common order passed by the National Commission the LRs of the complainant preferred Special Leave Petition Nos. 32406-07 of 2017 seeking further enhancement of compensation. Opposite party Nos. 5, 7 and 8 also preferred Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.19478-79 of 2019 challenging the National Commission’s order. 9. Brief arguments raised by the learned counsel for the LRs of the complainant seeking enhancement of compensation are that once the deficiency in service is proved, the compensation had to be assessed by applying the multiplier method. It was argued that deceased patient being a housewife, her notional income should have been taken for calculation of just and fair compensation. 9.1 It was also submitted that the National Commission did not provide any break-up for arriving at the enhanced compensation amount. Further, no compensation was awarded on account of future prospects, cost of litigation and under other heads. It was also argued that the National Commission ought to have awarded interest from the date of filing of the complaint. It was not justified in awarding interest only upon the opposite parties failing to pay the compensation amount within four weeks of the date of the passing of the order. Page 5 of 910. On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the contesting doctors against whom damages have been awarded submitted that it was not a case of deficiency in service as they had provided best medical aid, advice and treatment as per the standard medical protocols but still the patient could not survive. The amount of compensation awarded to the LRs of the complainant should be set aside as it will remain a scar on their professional career. 11. Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record. 12. Firstly, coming to the petitions filed by the contesting doctors. A perusal of the paper book and various orders passed by this Court shows that notice has not been issued in the same. 13. As far as petitions filed by the LRs of the deceased complainant are concerned, it is an admitted position that the Endoscopic Polypectomy procedure performed on the deceased patient was successful. It was after the procedure that the patient suffered cardiac arrest, which led her shifting to opposite party No.5, Dr. Rajendra Banthia’s nursing home, and subsequently to opposite party No.6, Dr. Gautam Darda’s hospital, where she eventually died. It Page 6 of 9was submitted on behalf of the LRs of the deceased patient that the opposite parties No. 1 to 4 were negligent in not conducting proper pre-anesthetic checkup before performing the procedure. Furthermore, it was submitted that the opposite party No. 5, Dr. Rajendra Banthia, who is a general physician, treated the patient without referring her to better medical facility in a timely manner. The submissions put forth by the LRs of the deceased complainant were duly considered by the National Commission, which after considering the material available on record provided for additional compensation to be paid by the opposite parties. 14. The position as it stands today after considering the reliefs awarded by the National Commission against different parties is: Amount awarded Towards Payable By (in ₹) 3,00,000/ (jointly Medical Expenses, Loss Opposite Party No.1 and severally) of Love and Mental (Dr. A.

--- JUDGMENT 164 ---
Out of the aforesaid parties, the opposite party No.1 through LRs and opposite party Nos. 2 to 4 have not challenged the order. Whereas in the S.L.P. (C) Nos.19478-19479 of 2019 filed by the opposite party No. 5 and opposite party Nos. 7 and 8, notice has not been issued. 16. From the facts as noticed and on a perusal of the orders passed by the different forums, better care of the patient could have been taken but the fact remains that she did not survive. She was 51 years of age at the time of her death. The National Commission has awarded additional compensation of ₹3,00,000/- in lumpsum to be paid by opposite party No. 1 through LRs and opposite party Nos. 2 to 4, along with ₹50,000/- each to be paid by opposite party No. 7 and 8, which in our opinion seems to be reasonable and justified, hence, deserves no further enhancement. The value of human life cannot be Page 8 of 9assessed in monetary terms whatsoever is awarded is a matter of solace. 17. We find the reliefs given above are sufficient in S.L.P.(C) Nos.32406-32407 of 2017 and hence no case is made out for grant of leave in the instant petitions. The same are accordingly dismissed. 18. Since the amount involved in the S.L.P. (C) Nos.19478-19479 of 2019 filed by the contesting doctors is minimal, no notice was issued by this Court. We do not find any merit in the present Special Leave Petitions as well, which are hereby dismissed. ……………….……………..J.

--- JUDGMENT 165 ---
The facts which give rise to the present appeal are as under:- 3.1 In October, 2021, Smt. Priyanka Sharma, Deputy Director of Income Tax (Investigation), Unit-2(2), Respondent No. 5 in the present proceedings, conducted a search and seizure operation in the case of several income-tax assessees including Shri Sunil Khemka (HUF), Smt. Sunita Khemka and Smt. Shivani Khemka at the third floor of Khataruka Niwas, South Gandhi Maidan, Patna. The said search and seizure operation was conducted on the basis of warrants of authorization issued under Section 132(1) of the Income Tax Act, 19614. During the course of the search, it was 2 ‘FIR’ for short. 3 ‘IPC’ for short. 4 ‘IT Act’ for short. 2found that Smt. Sunita Khemka held a bank locker bearing No. 462 in the appellant-bank at its Exhibition Road Branch, Patna. 3.2 On the basis of the said operation, on 5th October, 2021, an order under Section 132(3) of the IT Act was served upon the Branch Manager of the appellant-bank at its Exhibition Road Branch, Patna by the concerned Authorized Officer, thereby directing the said branch of the appellant-bank to stop the operation of any bank lockers, bank accounts and fixed deposits standing in the names of Shri Sunil Khemka (HUF), Smt. Sunita Khemka and Smt. Shivani Khemka, among several other individuals and entities, with immediate effect. It was further clarified that contravention of the order would render the Branch Manager liable under Section 275A of the IT Act and the same would result in penal action. 3.3 In compliance of the aforesaid order, the appellant-bank stopped the operation of the bank accounts, bank lockers and fixed deposits of the individuals/entities mentioned in the order. Further, on 7th October,2021, the appellant-bank 3blocked the bank accounts of the income-tax assesses named in the order and also sealed the bank locker bearing No. 462 belonging to Smt. Sunita Khemka. 3.4 Subsequently, on 1st November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 issued an order to the Branch Manager of the appellant- bank at its aforementioned branch thereby directing the appellant-bank to revoke the restraint put on the bank accounts of Smt. Sunita Khemka and three other persons, in view of the restraining order dated 5th October, 2021 passed under Section 132(3) of the IT Act. Accordingly, the said persons, including Smt. Sunita Khemka, were to be allowed to operate their bank accounts. The said order was received by the concerned Branch Manager of the appellant-bank of 8th November, 2021 at 4:00 p.m. However, on 2nd November, 2021 at 11:24 a.m., an email was sent to the Branch Manager which contained the same order. 3.5 Thereafter, on 9th November, 2021, the concerned branch of the appellant-bank allowed Smt. Sunita Khemka to operate her bank locker bearing No. 462 and proper entries 4recording the operation of the said locker were made in the bank’s records. 3.6 Subsequently, on 20th November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 conducted a search and seizure operation at the aforementioned bank locker in the concerned branch of the appellant-bank wherein it was found that Smt. Sunita Khemka had operated her bank locker with the assistance of the concerned officers of the appellant-bank. This was validated by the entry made in the bank’s records and the CCTV footage of the bank. Resultantly, the concerned officials of the aforementioned branch of the appellant-bank were found to have breached the restraining order dated 5th October, 2021. 3.7 Accordingly, on 20th November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 issued summons under Section 131(1A) of the IT Act to Abha Sinha-Branch Manager, Abhishek Kumar-Branch Operation Manager and Deepak Kumar-Teller Authoriser being the concerned officials of the appellant-bank at its aforementioned branch. 53.8 The aforementioned officials attended the office of Respondent No. 5 and their statements were recorded wherein Abha Sinha and Abhishek Kumar stated that there had been an inadvertent error on the part of the bank officials and they had misinterpreted the order dated 1st November, 2021. Since the said order pertained to the bank accounts of the concerned individuals including Smt. Sunita Khemka, the bank officials had misread the order to understand /assume that the revocation of the restraint extended to the bank lockers as well. Having misunderstood the order, the bank officials under a bona fide assumption that bank locker had been released as well, allowed Smt. Sunita Khemka to operate the same. 3.9 The statement of Smt. Sunita Khemka had also been recorded wherein she stated that her accountant Surendra Prasad, after speaking with Deepak Kumar, had informed her that the restraint on the aforementioned bank locker had been revoked and she could operate the said locker. This was specifically denied by Deepak Kumar in his statement. 63.10 Dissatisfied with the said explanations, Respondent No. 5 submitted a written complaint to the SHO, Gandhi Maidan Police Station seeking to register an FIR against Smt. Sunita Khemka and the concerned bank officials on the ground that the order dated 5th October, 2021 had been violated owing to the unlawful operation of the aforementioned locker. 3.11 On the basis of the said complaint, on 22nd November, 2021, an FIR being Case No. 549 of 2021 came to be registered against Smt. Sunita Khemka and the staff of the appellant-bank at its aforementioned branch for the offences punishable under Sections 34, 37, 120B, 201, 207, 217, 406, 409, 420 and 462 of the IPC at the Gandhi Maidan Police Station, Patna. 3.12 Aggrieved by the registration of the FIR, the appellant-bank preferred a Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case thereby invoking the inherent power of the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19735 for 5 Hereinafter referred to as ‘CrPC’ 7the quashing of the FIR. The High Court vide the impugned order dismissed the writ petition finding it to be devoid of merit. 3.13 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 4. We have heard Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Manish Kumar, learned Advocate-on-Record appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and Mr. Venkataraman Chandrashekhara Bharathi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.5. 5. Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Counsel submits that taking the FIR at its face value, it does not disclose any mens rea of the officials of the appellant-bank and it also fails to disclose the commission of any offence. He further submits that the complaint also does not disclose any specific allegation with regard to collusion between the unnamed staff of the appellant- bank with Ms. Sunita Khemka. The only allegation against the unnamed staff members of the appellant-bank is that while the Prohibitory Order dated 5th October 2021 was in force in relation to the bank locker No.462, Ms. Sunita Khema, customer of the 8appellant-bank, was permitted to operate the said bank locker. 6. The learned Senior Counsel submits that taking the allegations at their face value, they do not disclose commission of the alleged offences of Sections 420, 409, 406, 462, 206, 217, 201, 34, 120B and 37 of the IPC. It is submitted that it is settled law that the High Court while considering a petition under Section 482 of the CrPC for quashing the FIR must examine as to whether prima facie the ingredients of the offence have been made out in the FIR or not. In this regard, a reference is placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of Arnab Manoranjan Goswami v. State of Maharashtra and others6 and in the case of Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. and others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another7. 7. Shri Kaul, relying on the judgments of this Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others8, submits that the continuation of the prosecution of the appellant-bank and/or its staff under IPC would amount to undue hardship and miscarriage of justice. 6 (2021) 2 SCC 427 7 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2248 8 1992 Supp.

--- JUDGMENT 166 ---
Venkatkrishnan v. Central Bureau of Investigation9 has held that though a bank or a financial institution may not suffer ultimate loss but if the money has been allowed to be used by another person illegally for illegal purposes, the ingredients of Section 405 IPC would be attracted. 9. It is submitted that access of the bank locker given to Ms. Sunita Khemka in violation of Section 132(2) of the IT Act would attract the offence under Section 409 read with Section 405 of the IPC. 10. It is submitted that the High Court has rightly, relying on various judgments of this Court including Neeharika Infrastructure Private Limited v. State of Maharashtra and others10, held that the High Court cannot thwart any investigation into a cognizable offence, which is the statutory 9 (2009) 11 SCC 737 10 (2021) 19 SCC 401 10right and duty of the Police under the relevant provisions of the CrPC 11. He further submits that it is equally settled that the Court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR/complaint. 12.

--- JUDGMENT 167 ---
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, we have scrutinized the record. It will be relevant to refer to the Prohibitory Order issued by the Authorized Officer on 5th October 2021, which reads thus: “Sub: Order under 132(3) of the Income- Tax Act, 1961 in respect of bank Accounts, Lockers, Fixed Deposits etc.- regarding, Sir, In connection with search operation conducted under sub-section (1) of section 132 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961, in the office/residential/business premises of the under noted person, you are directed to STOP OPERATION, immediately, of Bank Lockers, Bank Accounts and Fixed Deposits, if any, standing in the below mentioned names(s) either singly or jointly, in terms of provisions of sub section (3) of section 132 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961. 11Sl. Name & Address of the Detail of No. person Bank Lockers/ Accounts/ Deposits 1. Sunil Kumar Khemka 2. Sunil Kumar Khemka (HUF) 3. Sunita Khemka 4. Saloni Khemka 5. Shivani Khemka 6. Sharda Devi Khemka 7. Sharda Tradelinks Pvt. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 168 ---
15. Paramount Financial Management 16. Maa Jagdamba Seva Samiti Trust 2. The contravention of this order shall render you liable, under section 275A of the Income-Tax Act, 1961, to punishment of rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and also render you liable to fine. 3. You are requested to intimate the balance 12standing in these accounts IMMEDIATELY to the bearer of this letter and send a statement of the said accounts since the opening of the accounts along with copy of account opening form to this office within 7 (seven) days of receipt of this order.” 13. It will also be relevant to refer to the Revocation Order dated 1st November 2021, issued by the Deputy Director of Income-Tax (Inv.) Unit-2(2), Guwahati, which reads thus: “Sub: Revocation of order under section 132(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 in respect of Bank Accounts, Lockers, Fixed Deposits, etc.-reg. Ref:- This office’s letter No.DIN/AC/DDIT/U 2(2)/GHY/2021-22, dated 05.10.2021. In this connection this is to state that, restrain order under Section 132(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, were put on the following bank accounts of the persons as stated below. The restrain order put on the following bank accounts only may be revoked by your kind self and they may be allowed to operate these accounts. Sl. Name of Account No. No. Account Holder 1. Sunil Kumar 01861000049315 Khemka (HUF) 2. Sunil Kumar 01861530001080 Khemka 3. Sunita Khemka 01861530001097 4. Shivani Khemka 01861460006152 1314. It could thus be seen that though vide order dated 5th October 2021, a restraint order was imposed in respect of Bank Lockers, Bank Accounts and Fixed Deposits, the Revocation Order dated 1st November 2021 only refers to the Bank Accounts. 15. In the statements of the Officers of the appellant-bank, it is stated that the bank locker was inadvertently permitted to be operated, by misinterpreting the Revocation Order dated 1st November 2021. 16.

--- JUDGMENT 169 ---
In the present case, we are only considering the FIR registered for the offences punishable under the different provisions of the IPC. 17. The FIR is registered on the basis of the complaint lodged by the Deputy Director of Income-Tax (Inv.) Unit-2(2), Guwahati, respondent No.5 herein. The only statement/allegation in the complaint with regard to the bank and its officers is thus: “However, it has come to the light, that the restraint order imposed under section 132(3) dated 05.10.21 has been breached and violated. During the course of execution of search & seizure operation on the Bank Locker no 462 under warrant of authorization dated 20.11.21, it is found that Smt Sunita Khemka has operated the 14bank Locker no-462 on 09.11.21. The bank locker register maintained at the HDFC bank states that the Smt Sunita Khemka has operated the Bank Locker at 11.53 am. The CCTV footage was has validated the fact that Smt Sunita Khemka aided by the HDFC Bank Exhibition Branch, Patna has breached the order under section 132(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and has unlawfully operated her Bank locker no 462 in the HDFC Bank.” 18. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of Arnab Manoranjan Goswami (supra): “62.

--- JUDGMENT 170 ---
Now in this backdrop, it becomes necessary to advert briefly to the contents of the FIR in the present case. The FIR recites that the spouse of the informant had a company carrying on the business of architecture, interior design and engineering consultancy. According to the informant, her husband was over the previous two years “having pressure as he did not receive the money of work carried out by him”. The FIR recites that the deceased had called at the office of the appellant and spoken to his accountant for the payment of money. Apart from the above statements, it has been stated that the deceased left behind a suicide note stating that his “money is stuck and following owners of respective companies are not paying our legitimate dues”. Prima facie, on the application of the test which has been laid down by this Court in a consistent line of authority which has been noted above, it cannot be said that the 15appellant was guilty of having abetted the suicide within the meaning of Section 306 IPC. These observations, we must note, are prima facie at this stage since the High Court is still to take up the petition for quashing. Clearly however, the High Court in failing to notice the contents of the FIR and to make a prima facie evaluation abdicated its role, functions and jurisdiction when seized of a petition under Section 482 CrPC. The High Court recited the legal position that the jurisdiction to quash under Section 482 has to be exercised sparingly. These words, however, are not meaningless incantations, but have to be assessed with reference to the contents of the particular FIR before the High Court. If the High Court were to carry out a prima facie evaluation, it would have been impossible for it not to notice the disconnect between the FIR and the provisions of Section 306 IPC. The failure of the High Court to do so has led it to adopting a position where it left the appellant to pursue his remedies for regular bail under Section 439. The High Court was clearly in error in failing to perform a duty which is entrusted to it while evaluating a petition under Section 482 albeit at the interim stage. 63. The petition before the High Court was instituted under Article 226 of the Constitution and Section 482 CrPC. While dealing with the petition under Section 482 for quashing the FIR, the High Court has not considered whether prima facie the ingredients of the offence have been made out in the FIR. If the High Court were 16to have carried out this exercise, it would (as we have held in this judgment) have been apparent that the ingredients of the offence have not prima facie been established. As a consequence of its failure to perform its function under Section 482, the High Court has disabled itself from exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 to consider the appellant's application for bail. In considering such an application under Article 226, the High Court must be circumspect in exercising its powers on the basis of the facts of each case. However, the High Court should not foreclose itself from the exercise of the power when a citizen has been arbitrarily deprived of their personal liberty in an excess of State power.” 19. In the present case, the FIR does not show that the appellant-bank had induced anyone since inception. 20. For bringing out the offence under the ambit of Section 420 IPC, the FIR must disclose the following ingredients: (a) That the appellant-bank had induced anyone since inception; (b) That the said inducement was fraudulent or dishonest; and (c) That mens rea existed at the time of such inducement. 1721. The appellant-bank is a juristic person and as such, a question of mens rea does not arise. However, even reading the FIR and the complaint at their face value, there is nothing to show that the appellant-bank or its staff members had dishonestly induced someone deceived to deliver any property to any person, and that the mens rea existed at the time of such inducement. As such, the ingredients to attract the offence under Section 420 IPC would not be available. 22. Insofar as the provisions of Section 409 IPC is concerned, the following ingredients will have to be made out: (a) That there has been any entrustment with the property, or with any dominion over property on a person in the capacity of a public servant or banker, etc.; (b) That the said person commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property. 23. For bringing out the case under criminal breach of trust, it will have to be pointed out that a person, with whom entrustment of a property is made, has dishonestly misappropriated it, or converted it to his own use, or dishonestly used it, or disposed of 18that property. 24. In the present case, there is not even an allegation of entrustment of the property which the appellant-bank has misappropriated or converted for its own use to the detriment of the respondent No.5. As such, the provisions of Section 406 and 409 IPC would also not be applicable. 25. As already discussed hereinabove, since there was no entrustment of any property with the appellant-bank, the ingredients of Section 462 IPC are also not applicable. 26. Likewise, since the offences under Section 206, 217 and 201 of the IPC requires mens rea, the ingredients of the said Sections also would not be available against the appellant-bank. 27. The FIR/complaint also does not show that the appellant- bank and its officers acted with any common intention or intentionally cooperated in the commission of any alleged offences. As such, the provisions of section 34, 37 and 120B of the IPC would also not be applicable. 28. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal and others (supra): 19“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised. (1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the 20evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused. (4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge. 21103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases; that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and that the or inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or caprice.” 29. We find that the present case would squarely fall within categories (2) and (3) of the law laid down by this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal and others (supra). 30. We are of the considered view that the continuation of the criminal proceedings against the appellant-bank would cause undue hardship to the appellant-bank. 31. In the result, we pass the following order. (i) The appeal is allowed. (ii) The impugned judgment and order dated 8th June 2022 passed by the learned Single Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 1375 of 2021 is quashed and set aside. 22(iii) The First Information Report being Case No. 549 of 2021 registered at Gandhi Maidan Police Station, Patna on 22nd November, 2021, against certain officials of the appellant-bank working at its Exhibition Road Branch, Patna for the offences punishable under Sections 34, 37, 120B, 201, 206, 217, 406, 409, 420 and 462 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is also quashed and set aside qua the appellant-bank ..............................J (B.R. GAVAI) ...........................................J (K.V.

--- JUDGMENT 171 ---
2024 INSC 810 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL No. 1031 of 2022 VIDYASAGAR PRASAD … APPELLANT(S) VERSUS UCO BANK & ANR. …RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 1. By the present appeal, the suspended director of the Corporate Debtor assails the order of the NCLAT1 affirming the order of the Adjudicating Authority2 admitting the application under Section 7 of IBC3 for initiating CIRP4 proceedings against the Corporate Debtor. 2. The undisputed facts before us are that the Corporate Debtor (respondent No. 2 herein), now represented by its Insolvency Resolution Professional (IRP), availed loan and credit facilities from 1 National Company Law Appellate Tribunal in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 238 of 2020, dated 04.10.2021. 2 Adjudicating Authority/National Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata Bench, Kolkata order dated 13.12.2019 in CP No. 254/KB/2019. 3 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 4 Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process. 1UCO Bank (respondent No. 1 herein) and other consortium of banks under agreements dated 21.06.2010, 30.08.2012, 19.07.2012 and 31.12.2012. The said loan and other credit facilities were availed for funding of Corporate Debtor’s Thermal Power Plant. 2.1 Having defaulted on repayment of principal as well as interest levied thereupon, Corporate Debtor’s account was declared as Non-Performing Asset (NPA) on 05.11.2014. Further, proceedings under SARFAESI5 Act and DRT6 for recovery of dues were also initiated. However, we are not concerned with these proceedings for disposal of the present appeal.

--- JUDGMENT 172 ---
24. On the issue of competency of the Bank to file the petition under Section 7, the Adjudicating Authority held that the General Manager of Bank was legally authorized as attorney to do all acts and also act on behalf of the Bank and he had the authority to sign the application. On the issue relating to the existence of debt, the Adjudicating Authority, examined the contract, the terms and conditions of sanction letter as well as the relevant credit agreements in detail and came to the conclusion that the amount was disbursed as a loan and the Corporate Debtor had in-fact defaulted in repayment of principal as well as interest levied thereupon. Thus, the contention that there was no debt was also rejected. 4.1 The main objection to the initiation of CIRP proceedings on the ground of limitation was rejected by the Adjudicating Authority on the ground that there is an acknowledgement of debt in the financial statements as well as auditor’s report of the Corporate Debtor for the year ending on 31.03.2017. On the basis of Section 238A of the Code, incorporating the Limitation Act, the Adjudicating Authority relied on Section 18 of the Limitation Act to reckon the period of limitation from the date of acknowledgement of the debt and concluded that the institution of 3CIRP on 13.02.2019 is within the period of limitation. The further contention of the Corporate Debtor that name of UCO Bank, the financial creditor, is not specifically mentioned in the relied upon entry in the balance sheet was rejected by NCLT by referring to the Explanation to Section 7(1) of the Code providing that the proceedings thereunder get triggered even in the case of a default by debtor in respect of any financial creditor other than the applicant. 5. Aggrieved by the admission of Section 7 application, initiation of CIRP and appointment of IRP, the appellant preferred an appeal to the NCLAT, Principal Bench. The same arguments were advanced before the NCLAT and having considered the same in detail, the NCLAT dismissed the appeal with the following reasoning: “11.5 Therefore, in the instant case, the balance sheet that has been brought on record in the instant case before the Adjudicating Authority shall be taken into consideration while deciding the question of limitation and default on the part of the Corporate Debtor. The said documents cannot be ignored simply on the premise that it is not pleaded in the Application filed in Form-1 for initiation of the Corporate Insolvency Process. 11.6 We find that the balance sheet for the financial year ending on March 31 2017, was part of the record before the learned Adjudicating Authority and was annexed with Section 7 Application, which was also duly admitted by the Appellant during the hearing. Subsequently, the balance sheet for the financial year ending will March 31 2019, was annexed with the reply filed by Respondent No. 1 before this 4Hon'ble Tribunal on March 02, 2020. However, as the practice and procedure of this Hon'ble Tribunal, the same was not accepted at the filing counter without the specific mention of this Hon'ble Tribunal. Accordingly, a copy of the Application for the additional document is also annexed as Annexure A. Subsequently; this Hon'ble Tribunal permitted such additional documents to be taken on record vide its Order dated July 15 2020. 11.7 The Company's balance sheet is prepared in the statutory format as per Schedule 3rd of the Companies Act 2013, which does not provide for giving the specific name of every secured or unsecured creditor. 11.8 It is further observed that the Corporate Debtor has not denied that there are no outstanding dues to the UCO Bank. A perusal of extract of register of charges submitted with ROC, at Sr. No. 3, shows that a charge of rupees one hundred and seventy-five crores created by the Corporate Debtor has not been satisfied and remains outstanding. 11.9 After the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited v. Bishal Jaiswal (supra), it is settled that entries in books of accounts and/or balance sheets of a Corporate Debtor would amount to an acknowledgement under Section 18. 11.10 In the instant case, we also find that the Corporate Debtor issued a letter dated June 07 2016 (Annexure A Page 11 of their reply affidavit of R-1) wherein it has given OTS proposal. Based on the ratio of the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lakshmirattan Cotton Mills Co Ltd and further reiterated in Dena Bank's case (supra) that there is an acknowledgement of subsisting liability of the Corporate Debtor. However, it may not necessarily specify the exact nature of the liability. But it indicates the jural relation between the parties, and in any event, the same can also be derived by implication. Further, the said Letter is not "without prejudice" basis and, therefore, amounts to an unequivocal acknowledgement of liability of the Corporate Debtor. A reading of the documents above reveals that the Corporate Debtor has acknowledged/subsisting liability to attract the provisions of Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963. 11.11 Based on the discussion as above, we think that the present Appeal is liable to be dismissed, and the interim Order dated April 07, 2020, is exposed to vacated.” 56. Mr.

--- JUDGMENT 173 ---
Balbir Singh, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has emphatically argued only one point before us. It is that there is no clear and unequivocal acknowledgement of debt of the Corporate Debtor in the entries of the balance sheets. If this is true, it is submitted, then the financial creditor cannot have the benefit of Section 18 of the Limitation Act to extend the period of limitation which commenced on 05.11.2014. 7. The commencement of a fresh period of limitation from the time of acknowledgement of the debt is part of the statutory scheme. Section 238A of the Code extends the applicability of the provisions of the Limitation Act to the proceedings under the Code. With the extension of Limitation Act to the provisions of the Code, the benefit of Section 18 of the Limitation Act dealing with the effect of acknowledgement of a debt in writing applies. Considering the same issue in Laxmi Pat Surana v. Union Bank of India7, the Court observed: “42. Notably, the provisions of the Limitation Act have been made applicable to the proceedings under the Code, as far as may be applicable. For, Section 238-A predicates that the provisions of the Limitation Act shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedings or appeals before the adjudicating authority, NCLAT, the DRT or the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be. After enactment of Section 238-A IBC on 6-6-2018, validity whereof has been upheld by this Court, it is not open to contend that the limitation for filing application under Section 7 IBC would be limited to 7 (2021) 8 SCC 481. 6Article 137 of the Limitation Act and extension of prescribed period in certain cases could be only under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. There is no reason to exclude the effect of Section 18 of the Limitation Act to the proceedings initiated under the Code. 43. Ordinarily, upon declaration of the loan account/debt as NPA that date can be reckoned as the date of default to enable the financial creditor to initiate action under Section 7 IBC. However, Section 7 comes into play when the corporate debtor commits “default”. Section 7, consciously uses the expression “default” — not the date of notifying the loan account of the corporate person as NPA. Further, the expression “default” has been defined in Section 3(12) to mean non-payment of “debt” when whole or any part or instalment of the amount of debt has become due and payable and is not paid by the debtor or the corporate debtor, as the case may be. In cases where the corporate person had offered guarantee in respect of loan transaction, the right of the financial creditor to initiate action against such entity being a corporate debtor (corporate guarantor), would get triggered the moment the principal borrower commits default due to non-payment of debt. Thus, when the principal borrower and/or the (corporate) guarantor admit and acknowledge their liability after declaration of NPA but before the expiration of three years therefrom including the fresh period of limitation due to (successive) acknowledgments, it is not possible to extricate them from the renewed limitation accruing due to the effect of Section 18 of the Limitation Act. Section 18 of the Limitation Act gets attracted the moment acknowledgment in writing signed by the party against whom such right to initiate resolution process under Section 7 IBC enures. Section 18 of the Limitation Act would come into play every time when the principal borrower and/or the corporate guarantor (corporate debtor), as the case may be, acknowledge their liability to pay the debt. Such acknowledgment, however, must be before the expiration of the prescribed period of limitation including the fresh period of limitation due to acknowledgment of the debt, from time to time, for institution of the proceedings under Section 7 IBC. Further, the acknowledgment must be of a liability in respect of which the financial creditor can initiate action under Section 7 IBC.” (emphasis supplied) 77.1 In Dena Bank v. C. Shivakumar Reddy8 after reviewing the case law on the subject, this Court held; “138. While it is true that default in payment of a debt triggers the right to initiate the corporate resolution process, and a petition under Section 7 or 9 IBC is required to be filed within the period of limitation prescribed by law, which in this case would be three years from the date of default by virtue of Section 238-A IBC read with Article 137 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, the delay in filing a petition in the NCLT is condonable under Section 5 of the Limitation Act unlike delay in filing a suit. Furthermore, as observed above Sections 14 and 18 of the Limitation Act are also applicable to proceedings under the IBC. ………… 140. To sum up, in our considered opinion an application under Section 7 IBC would not be barred by limitation, on the ground that it had been filed beyond a period of three years from the date of declaration of the loan account of the corporate debtor as NPA, if there were an acknowledgment of the debt by the corporate debtor before expiry of the period of limitation of three years, in which case the period of limitation would get extended by a further period of three years.” (emphasis supplied) 7.2 A reference must also be made to a three Judge Bench decision in Rajendra Narottamdas Sheth v. Chandra Prakash Jain9 which succinctly observed; “27. It is no more res integra that Section 18 of the Limitation Act is applicable to applications filed under Section 7 of the Code. In case the application under Section 7 is filed beyond the period of three years from the date of default and the financial creditor furnishes the required information relating to the acknowledgment of debt, in writing by the corporate debtor, before the adjudicating authority, with such acknowledgment having taken place within the initial period of three years from the date of default, a fresh period of limitation commences and the 8 (2021) 10 SCC 330 9 (2022) 5 SCC 600 8application can be entertained, if filed within this extended period.” (emphasis supplied) 8. In view of the above referred principles, we will now consider the nuanced arguments advanced by Mr. Balbir Singh that there is no unequivocal, unambiguous and specific acknowledgement of debt owed to UCO Bank in the balance sheet entries of Corporate Debtor for the years 2017 and 2019. In the absence of clear demarcation as to what the Corporate Debtor owes to the UCO Bank, the said entries cannot be relied on for the purpose of extending the period of limitation in terms of Section 18 of the Limitation Act. Mr. Balbir Singh further argues that even if said entry is taken to be an acknowledgment of debt, the same cannot aid respondent No.1’s case since it fails to mention the name of financial creditor. 8.1 Mr.

--- JUDGMENT 174 ---
Partha Sil, counsel on behalf of respondent No. 1-Bank submitted that the Balance Sheets of a company are prepared in the prescribed statutory format as per Section 129, read with Schedule III of the Companies Act 2013, which does not provide for giving specific names of each and every Secured and Unsecured creditor. In support of his submission, Mr. Partha Sil referred to the judgment in Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Ltd. v. 9Bishal Jaiswal10 where it was observed that there was no compulsion for Companies to make any particular admissions in the balance sheet, except for what is prescribed. 9. A three Judge Bench of this Court in Bishal Jaiswal (Supra) has addressed and clarified this issue by holding that; “35. A perusal of the aforesaid sections would show that there is no doubt that the filing of a balance sheet in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act is mandatory, any transgression of the same being punishable by law. However, what is of importance is that notes that are annexed to or forming part of such financial statements are expressly recognised by Section 134(7). Equally, the auditor's report may also enter caveats with regard to acknowledgments made in the books of accounts including the balance sheet. A perusal of the aforesaid would show that the statement of law contained in Bengal Silk Mills Co. v. Ismail Golam Hossain Ariff , that there is a compulsion in law to prepare a balance sheet but no compulsion to make any particular admission, is correct in law as it would depend on the facts of each case as to whether an entry made in a balance sheet qua any particular creditor is unequivocal or has been entered into with caveats, which then has to be examined on a case by case basis to establish whether an acknowledgment of liability has, in fact, been made, thereby extending limitation under Section 18 of the Limitation Act.” (emphasis supplied) 10. Having considered the specific facts and circumstances of this case, the Adjudicating Authority as well as the NCLAT have concurrently held that the entries in the balance sheets amount to clear acknowledgment of debt. We agree with the findings. Further, Note 3.4 appended to said balance sheet entry dated 31.03.2017 10 (2021) 6 SCC 366. 10mentions that “company has made certain defaults in the repayment of term loans and interest.” It further mentions of a continuing default. The entry also mentions long-term borrowings. The conclusions of NCLT and NCLAT that there is acknowledgment of debt are unimpeachable. 10.1 Following the principles as expounded in the case of Bishal Jaiswal (Supra), the Adjudicating Authority as well as the NCLAT have examined the case in detail and have come to the conclusion that the entry made in the balance sheet coupled with the note of the auditor of the appellant clearly amounts to acknowledgement of the liability. We see no reason whatsoever to take a different view of the matter.

--- JUDGMENT 175 ---
and Messrs Behari Lal Ram Charan v. Aluminium Corporation of India Limited11. The implication of a statement about a present and subsisting debt of a Corporate Debtor is articulated by this Court in the following manner; “9. It is clear that the statement on which the plea of acknowledgment is founded must relate to a subsisting liability as the section requires that it must be made before the expiration of the period prescribed under the Act. It need not, however, amount to a promise to pay, for, an acknowledgment does not create a new right of action but merely extends the period of limitation. The statement need not indicate the exact nature or the specific character of the liability. The words used in the statement in question, however, must relate to a present subsisting liability and indicate the existence of jural relationship between the parties, such as, for instance, that of a debtor and a creditor and the intention to admit such jural relationship. Such an intention need not be in express terms and can be inferred by implication from the nature of the admission and the surrounding circumstances. Generally speaking, a liberal construction of the statement in question should be given. That of course does not mean that where a statement is made without intending to admit the existence of jural relationship, such intention should be fastened on the person making the statement by an involved and far- fetched reasoning…” (emphasis supplied) 11.1 It is also relevant to refer to judgment in Dena Bank (Supra) which held as follows: “139. Section 18 of the Limitation Act cannot also be construed with pedantic rigidity in relation to proceedings under the IBC. This Court sees no reason why an offer of one- time settlement of a live claim, made within the period of limitation, should not also be construed as an acknowledgment to attract Section 18 of the Limitation Act…” (emphasis supplied) 11 (1971) 1 SCC 67. 1212. Both these factors, acknowledgment of debt in the balance sheet as well as in the OTS proposal, have been considered by NCLAT while dismissing the appeal. The relevant portion of the NCLAT findings, after considering balance sheet entries and OTS letter are as follows: “11.7 The Company's balance sheet is prepared in the statutory format as per Schedule 3rd of the Companies Act 2013, which does not provide for giving the specific name of every secured or unsecured creditor. 11.8 It is further observed that the Corporate Debtor has not denied that there are no outstanding dues to the UCO Bank. A perusal of extract of register of charges submitted with ROC, at Sr. No. 3, shows that a charge of rupees one hundred and seventy-five crores created by the Corporate Debtor has not been satisfied and remains outstanding. 11.10 In the instant case, we also find that the Corporate Debtor issued a letter dated June 07 2016 (Annexure A Page 11 of their reply affidavit of R-1) wherein it has given OTS proposal. Based on the ratio of the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lakshmirattan Cotton Mills Co Ltd and further reiterated in Dena Bank's case (supra) that there is an acknowledgement of subsisting liability of the Corporate Debtor. However, it may not necessarily specify the exact nature of the liability. But it indicates the jural relation between the parties, and in any event, the same can also be derived by implication. Further, the said Letter is not "without prejudice" basis and, therefore, amounts to an unequivocal acknowledgement of liability of the Corporate Debtor. A reading of the documents above reveals that the Corporate Debtor has acknowledged/subsisting liability to attract the provisions of Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963.” 13. Having examined the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that the findings arrived at by the Adjudicating Authority and NCLAT are correct in law and fact. We find no merit in the appeal. 13The Civil Appeal No. 1031 of 2022 arising out of the NCLAT order dated 04.10.2021 (Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 238 of 2020) is dismissed accordingly. 14. No order as to costs. ………………………………....J.

--- JUDGMENT 176 ---
2. These two appeals arise from an order dated 04.04.2022 passed by the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack1 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.2083 of 2011, whereby, the High Court partly allowed the said writ petition filed by M/s. Express Publications (Madurai) Ltd2 challenging the award dated 22.09.2010 passed by the Labour Court, Bhubaneswar3 in I.D. Case No.27 of 2007. By the impugned order, the High Court set aside the award of the Labour Court to the extent that the employee is to be reinstated and to be paid compensation of Rs.75,000/- in lieu of back wages, while upholding the finding of the 1 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court” 2 For short, “the management” 3 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the Labour Court”2 Labour Court that the employee falls under the definition of “workman” as given in section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 19474. 3. Feeling aggrieved and being dissatisfied with the respective portion of the impugned order of the High Court, both the parties have preferred the instant appeals. 4. A few facts which are necessary for disposal of both the appeals, are as follows: The management is a newspaper establishment publishing a daily newspaper in English viz., New Indian Express having its publication unit at Bhubaneswar. The employee was initially appointed as Junior Engineer (Electronics and Communication)5 by the management on 07.06.1997 and was subsequently, confirmed in the said post on 13.07.1998. He was thereafter promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer (E&C) with effect from 01.05.2000 and was regularised in the said post with effect from 01.05.2001. While so, he was relieved from service on 08.10.2003, by paying a sum of Rs.6,995.65 towards one month salary in lieu of notice. Aggrieved by the same, he approached the Labour authorities, who referred the matter for conciliation. After failure of the conciliation and based on the opinion of the appropriate authority that an industrial dispute exists between the parties, a reference was made, which culminated in I.D. Case No.27 of 2007, in which, the Labour Court passed an award on 22.09.2010, reinstating the employee in service along with compensation of Rs.75,000/- in lieu of back wages, after having held that the employee was a “workman” in terms of section 2(s) of the I.D. Act.

--- JUDGMENT 177 ---
Challenging the same, the management filed the aforesaid writ petition, which was partly allowed by the High Court, in the terms as already stated in paragraph 2 supra. Therefore, the present Civil Appeals by both the parties. 5. The learned senior counsel appearing for the employee contended that the 4 For short, “the I.D. Act” 5 For short, “E&C”3 employee falls within the ambit of “workman” as per section 2(s) of the Act; he was terminated by the management without any reason; he was not given any opportunity before such termination nor there was any contract of service that his services will be terminated on 08.10.2003; and thus, there was a clear violation of provision of law in terminating the services of the employee. Taking note of the same, the Labour Court rightly passed the award in setting aside such illegal termination and directing the management to reinstate the employee in service. Without properly appreciating the same, the High Court set aside the part of the award viz., direction to the management to reinstate the employee in service with payment of lumpsum compensation in lieu of back wages, by the order impugned herein, which will have to be set aside. 6. Drawing our attention to the judgments of this Court compiled in the form of typed set of papers, the learned senior counsel for the employee made the following submissions: (i) In Industrial Law, interpreted and applied in the perspective of Part IV of the Constitution, the benefit of reasonable doubt on law and facts, if there be such doubt, must go to the weaker section, Labour6; (ii) Concurrent findings of facts rendered by the Courts below cannot be interfered with by the writ Court7; (iii) The determining factor for a person to be qualified as “workman” as defined under section 2(s) of the I.D. Act is the nature of work done by him and not merely on the designation of his post8. Whether or not an employee is a “workman” under section 2(s) of the I.D. Act is required to be determined with reference to his principal nature of duties and functions; and the designation of an employee is not of 6 K.C.P. Employees Association v.

--- JUDGMENT 178 ---
K.C.P. Ltd (1978) 2 SCC 42 7 Southern Ispat Ltd v. State of Kerala, (2004) 4 SCC 68 8 Shard Kumar v. NCT of Delhi, (2002) 4 SCC 4904 much importance and what is important is the nature of duties being performed by the employee9; (iv) Merely having a junior does not make an employee a supervisor or managerial cadre10; and (v) In cases of wrongful / illegal termination of service, reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages is the normal rule11; and since the order of termination is void ab initio, the workman is entitled to full back wages12. By making the above submissions, the learned counsel prayed to allow the appeal filed by the employee and dismiss the appeal filed by the management and consequently, direct the management to reinstate the employee in service with full back wages. 7. It is the submission of the learned senior counsel for the management that the employee was discharging his duties initially as Junior Engineer (E&C) in group 3 (Admn) and thereafter as Assistant Engineer (E&C) in group 2A (Admn); the nature of the work performed by him was in the supervisory capacity; and his total emolument in the post of Assistant Engineer (E&C) as on 01.05.2001 was Rs.6805.45; and he was terminated from service on 08.10.2003 as his service was no longer required for the management. While so, he does not qualify to be a “workman” within the meaning of section 2(s) of the I.D. Act. It is further contended by the learned counsel that at the time of termination of the employee i.e., on 08.10.2003, the statutory requirement for a person to be classified as a “workman” in the I.D. Act was a salary of not exceeding Rs.1,600/- per month. However, the High Court proceeded to apply Amendment Act 24 of 2010 which came into force with effect from 15.09.2010, wherein, the statutory requirement 9 S.K.Maini v. Carona Sahu Co. Ltd, (1994) 3 SCC 510 10 Ananda Bazar Patrika (P) Ltd v. Workmen, (1970) 3 SCC 248 11 Deepali Gundu Surwase v. Kranti Junior Adhyapak Mahavidyalaya, (2013) 10 SCC 324 12 Jasmer Singh v. State of Haryana, (2015) 4 SCC 4585 for a person employed in the supervisory capacity to be qualified as a “workman” was a salary of not exceeding Rs.10,000/- per month, and erroneously upheld the finding of the Labour Court that the employee was a “workman” as defined under section 2(s) of the I.D. Act.

--- JUDGMENT 179 ---
Therefore, the learned counsel sought to allow the appeal filed by the management, by setting aside the order of the High Court to that extent. 8. Continuing further, the learned senior counsel for the management submitted that the employee was appointed as Junior Engineer (E&C) in Group 3 (Admn) with a monthly pay of Rs.4761.75 by the management on 07.06.1997 and clause 14 of the appointment letter clearly indicated that after confirmation, the termination of service would require one month notice period or one month salary in lieu of notice by either of the parties. That apart, the employee was given promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer (E&C) on 25.05.2000 and his services as Asst. Engineer (E&C) in group 2A (Admn) were regularized with effect from 01.05.2001 with a total pay of Rs.6,805.45 per month; and it was categorically stated in the confirmation letter dated 30.04.2001 that all other terms and conditions mentioned in the Appointment Order dated 07.06.1997 shall continue to apply. In the light of the rules of the company and the terms of the employment orders, the management relieved the employee from duty by paying one month salary in lieu of notice on 08.10.2003, which was accepted and also encashed by the employee. Hence, there is no procedural violation of law on the part of the management in terminating the services of the employee. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the order of the High Court setting aside the award of the Labour Court to the extent of reinstating the employee with compensation in lieu of back wages, requires no interference by this Court. 9.

--- JUDGMENT 180 ---
Section 2(s) of the I.D. Act defines “workman”, which is quoted below for ready reference: “2(s) "Workman" means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person— (i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or (ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison; or (iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or (iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding [ten thousand rupees]13 per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature.” As per the above provision, a person to be qualified as a “workman” has to do any work of manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory in nature. But, the latter part of the section excludes four classes of employees including a person employed in a supervisory capacity drawing wages exceeding Rs.10,000/- after 13 Substituted by Act 24 of 2010, S.2, for “one thousand six hundred rupees” (w.e.f 15-09-2010)7 amendment (Rs.1,600/- before amendment) per month or exercises functions mainly of a managerial nature. In this legal backdrop, let us first examine, whether the employee falls within the definition of “workman”. 12. According to the employee, he comes within the meaning of “workman” as given in section 2(s) of the I.D. Act and the management without following the legal procedure, relieved him from service abruptly and hence, the same is illegal termination. On the other hand, it was the case of the management that the nature of the duties and functions performed by the employee was in the supervisory capacity and he was drawing a salary of above Rs.1,600/- and therefore, he does not belong to the category of “workmen”. To prove their respective claims, the employee and the Senior Manager of the management were examined as W.W.1 and M.W.1; and Exts.W1 to W5 and Exts.A to D were marked before the Labour Court. 13. Evidently, the employee was appointed as Junior Engineer (E&C) with effect from 07.06.1997 under Group 3 (Admn) with a salary of Rs.4761.75 per month. Clause 14 of the appointment order issued by the management makes it clear that after confirmation of the job, the termination of service will be by one month's notice or one month's salary in lieu of notice by either side. It is not in dispute that the posting of the employee in the cadre of Junior Engineer was confirmed with effect from 07.06.1998 vide letter dated 13.07.1998. As per the letter dated 25.05.2000 of the management, the employee was promoted as Assistant Engineer (E&C) in Group 2A (Admn) with effect from 01.05.2000 and his revised salary was Rs.6008.79 per month. The services of the employee as Assistant Engineer were confirmed with effect from 01.05.2001 vide letter dated 30.04.2001 and it was categorically stated in the said letter that all other terms and conditions mentioned in the appointment order dated 07.06.1997 shall continue to hold8 good. Vide letter dated 08.10.2003, it was informed that the services of the employee were no longer required by the management and hence, he was relieved from duty forthwith. 14. During the course of examination, the employee deposed as W.W.1 that he was not an executive cadre employee and there were senior officers to supervise and control his work. But, in the cross-examination, he asserted that he was supervising the work of two juniors who were working under him. According to M.W.1- Senior Manager of the management, the employee was an executive of the management and the management appointed two Junior Engineers and their works were being supervised by the said employee. 15. The law is well settled that the determinative factor for “workman” covered under section 2(s) of the I.D. Act, is the principal duties and functions performed by an employee in the establishment and not merely the designation of his post. Further, the onus of proving the nature of employment rests on the person claiming to be a “workman” within the definition of section 2(s) of the I.D. Act.

--- JUDGMENT 181 ---
16. In the present case, there is no specific document adduced relating to the actual work and functions performed by the employee. In the absence of any concrete material to demonstrate the nature of duties discharged by the employee, the employment orders issued by the management will have to be taken into consideration and as per the same, the employee was appointed as Junior Engineer and was promoted as Assistant Engineer, on the administrative side. It is the evidence of M.W.1 that the employee was supervising the work of two junior Engineers, who were working under him, which was also admitted by the employee in his cross examination, as W.W.1. Even according to the9 employee, the nature of duties and functions discharged by him was of supervisory. As such, applying the pre-amended provision of section 2(s), since the employee was terminated from service on 08.10.2003 and was drawing salary of more than Rs.1,600/-, he does not come within the definition of “workman”. Therefore, we hold that the employee is not a “workman” as defined under section 2(s) and is not covered by the provisions of the I.D. Act. In view of the same, the order of the High Court upholding the finding of the Labour Court that the employee was a “workman” within the definition of post-amended section 2(s), is liable to be set aside. 17. As regards the grant of reinstatement of the employee in service and payment of compensation in lieu of back wages by the Labour Court, it appears to us that in terms of clause 14 of the appointment letter, the employee was required to be paid one month salary in lieu of notice. As is evident from the letter dated 08.10.2003 of the management, the employee was relieved from duty with effect from that date; and he was issued with a cheque bearing No.019345 for Rs.6995.85 drawn on UT1 Bank Ltd, Bhubaneswar, towards one month salary in lieu of notice, as per the rules of company and in terms of clause 14 of the appointment order issued by the management. It is an admitted fact that without any objection, the employee accepted the said cheque and encashed the same. Hence, there is no violation of procedure on the part of the management in terminating the services of the employee. As already held above, the employee is not a “workman” as covered under section 2(s) and hence, the provisions of the I.D. Act do not apply to him. Resultantly, the contention of the learned senior counsel for the employee qua violation of section 25F coupled with sections 25G and 25H of the I.D. Act, ordering reinstatement with full back wages as normal rule, etc., cannot be countenanced by us. Though we are in agreement with the principles laid down in the10 citations relied on by the learned counsel for the employee, they do not come to rescue the employee as the facts of the same are distinguishable. Thus, we do not find any infirmity or illegality in the order of the High Court setting aside the award of the Labour Court which directed reinstatement of the employee along with payment of compensation in lieu of back wages and hence, the same does not call for any interference by us. 18. In the light of the foregoing findings, we set aside the order of the High Court confirming the finding of the Labour Court to the extent that the employee was a “workman” within the meaning of section 2(s) of the I.D. Act; and we affirm the same, insofar as setting aside the award of the Labour Court to reinstate the employee in service and pay compensation of Rs.75,000/- in lieu of back wages. 19. Accordingly, the Appeal filed by the employee stands dismissed and the Appeal filed by the management stands allowed. There is no order as to costs. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. .....................................J. [Pankaj Mithal] .....................................J. [R. Mahadevan] NEW DELHI OCTOBER 21, 2024

--- JUDGMENT 182 ---
After investigation, a charge-sheet was submitted on 08.02.2019 under the aforesaid sections. 4. During the trial the Examination-in-Chief of the victim (respondent no.2) PW1, her mother Sabiya Rahaman (PW 2) and her father Aslam Shaikh (PW 3) were recorded. However, their cross- examination was deferred on an application made by the accused-appellant. The Examination-in-Chief was conducted on 29.02.2020. On 07.03.2020 an application under section 319 CrPC was filed by respondent no.2 for further summoning the father and 1 CrPC 2 FIR 3 IPC SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 2 of 14mother of the accused-appellant. Thereafter it appears that the above three prosecution witnesses did not appear before the Trial Court for their cross-examination despite having received the summons. On 14.09.2020 again an adjournment was sought on behalf of PWs 1, 2 and 3 whereupon the Trial Court recorded that despite the specific repeated orders, the prosecution witnesses are not coming forward for cross-examination and that the witnesses as such are wilfully disobeying the orders of the Court. The Trial Court directed that the cross- examination of the witnesses is fixed for the next date and orders would be passed on the application under section 319 CrPC after the examination of all the witnesses are over. The order dated 14.09.2020 is reproduced hereunder: “Today is fixed for cross-examination of PW 1, PW2 and PW 3. Sole accused Asim Akhtar is present by filing hazira. SR of summons are received after service. On behalf of the defacto complainant a petition has been filed praying for disposal of the application under SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 3 of 14section 319 CrPC with affidavit. Copy is seen by the PP in charge. On behalf of the PW 1 PW 2 and PW 3 a petition has been filed for an adjournment with xerox copy of prescription Copy is also seen by the PP in charge. Perused the petition. Heard both sides. Admittedly, the petition has been filed by the de facto complainant with an affidavit. The affidavit is sworn at Sealdah Court on 14.09.2020 before the Notary Public Sarbani Mitra but the said witness failed to appear before the court. That factum goes to show that the said witness wilfully disobeyed the order of court. The application under section 319 CrPC is heard in presence of both sides. The order will be passed after the examination of all the witnesses are over. Tomorrow for examination and cross examination of all the witnesses and order to respect the application under section 319 CrPC.” 5. On 15.09.2020 again the witnesses remained absent and filed an application for adjournment. SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 4 of 14They also moved an application seeking four weeks’ time to bring appropriate orders from the High Court regarding no adverse orders being passed in case of non-appearance of parties owing to the Covid-19 pandemic. Yet another application was filed for giving a direction to the concerned authority to issue urgent certified copy of the order passed by the High Court. 6. The Trial Court recorded in detail the past conduct of the PWs 1, 2 and 3 that despite the service of summons, they had not been appearing for cross-examination. It was also recorded that PW 1 – the complainant had come to the Court with a sworn affidavit in her application under section 319 CrPC but did not care to attend the trial proceedings and present herself for cross-examination. 7. The Trial Court further proceeded to record that although the complainant wants the trial to proceed but is not coming forward for being cross-examined and has only filed an application to the effect that the application under section 319 CrPC may be heard and decided before the cross-examination. Even the Public Prosecutor SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 5 of 14had opposed the application filed by the de facto complainant for hearing of the 319 CrPC application. He also stated that other witnesses are coming and returning because of the repeated absence of PWs 1,2 and 3. The Trial Court thus fixed 29.09.2020 for cross- examination and also recorded its displeasure and inclination to execute the bailable warrants of arrest against the witnesses. It directed the Public Prosecutor to ensure presence of the witnesses and also directed the Investigating Officer to remain present with the witnesses. 8. Again on 21.09.2020 the sole accused – appellant was present. An application was filed by the complainant-respondent no.2 stating that aggrieved by the orders dated 14.09.2020 and 15.09.2020 she had preferred CRR No.1357/2020 and CRAN No.1/2020 which is likely to be taken up on 23.09.2020, as such the matter be adjourned for two more weeks. Respondent no.2 further filed an application for offences under Section 354 and 354B of the IPC which required to be added along with existing sections. Once again PWs 1 and 3 were present SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 6 of 14but the counsel for the complainant again insisted that they are ready to face the cross- examination, however, the application under section 319 CrPC may be disposed of first. 9. The Trial Court recorded their stand that they would not face cross-examination until the application under Section 319 CrPC is decided. The counsel for the accused-appellant was ready to cross-examine but could not proceed as the prosecution witnesses did not agree and continued to insist that the application under section 319 CrPC be decided first. 10. The Trial Court recorded all the facts, the contentions and also the conduct of the parties during the trial and ultimately proceeded to close the evidence of the prosecution. The Trial Court further went on to decide the application under section 319 CrPC and held that the evidence recorded so far was not admissible as the witnesses had failed to present themselves for cross-examination as such there was no justification for summoning the parents of the accused-appellant on the basis of inadmissible evidence. Accordingly, the same was rejected. SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 7 of 14The Trial Court further proceeded to hold that it was a case of no evidence under Section 232 CrPC and thereby acquitted the accused- appellant. 11. Aggrieved by the same, respondent no.2 preferred an appeal before the High Court which has since been allowed by the impugned judgment and order, giving rise to the present appeal. 12. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and for the respondent no.1 -State of West Bengal. Despite service of notice, no one has put in appearance on behalf of respondent no.2- Complainant. 13.

--- JUDGMENT 183 ---
The High Court in paragraph 15 of the impugned judgment relied upon a paragraph of the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of Hardeep Singh vs. State of Punjab & Ors.4 wherein it was held that “….power under section 319 CrPC can be exercised at the stage of completion of examination-in-chief and the court does not need to wait till the said evidence is 4 (2014) 3 SCC 92 SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 8 of 14tested in cross-examination, for it is the satisfaction of the court, which can be gathered from the reasons recorded by the court, in respect of complicity of some other person(s) not facing the trial in the offence.” The said view of the Constitution Bench has been taken as a mandate by the High Court that application under section 319 CrPC must be necessarily decided even if the cross-examination has not been conducted, only on the basis of Examination-in-Chief. Relying upon the same, the High Court has set aside the order of the acquittal passed by the Trial Court and has remanded the matter to the Trial Court with the direction to first decide the application under section 319 CrPC and thereafter proceed with the sessions trial expeditiously. 14. The judgment in the case of Hardeep Singh (supra) does not provide that it is mandatory to decide the application under section 319 CrPC before conducting cross-examination and only on the basis of examination-in-chief. It merely clarifies that even examination-in-chief is part of SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 9 of 14evidence and record and thus can be relied upon to decide an application under section 319 CrPC. 15. The judgment does not take away the discretion of the Trial Court to wait for the cross- examination to take place before deciding the application under section 319 CrPC. It merely provides that consideration of such an application should not be a mini trial. It is for the Trial Court to decide whether the application should be decided without waiting for the cross- examination to take place or to wait for it. The same would depend upon the satisfaction of the Trial Court on the basis of the material placed on record.

--- JUDGMENT 184 ---
As held in Mohd. Shafi (Supra) and Harbhajan Singh (Supra), all that is required for the exercise of the power under Section 319 CrPC is that, it must appear to the court that some other person also who is not facing the trial, may also have been involved in the offence. The pre-requisite for the exercise of this power is similar to the prima facie view which the magistrate must come to in order to take cognizance of the offence. Therefore, no straight-jacket formula can and should be laid with respect to conditions precedent for arriving at such an opinion and, if the Magistrate/Court is convinced even on the basis of evidence appearing in Examination-in- Chief, it can exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC and can proceed against such other person(s). It is essential to note that the Section also uses the words ‘such person could be tried’ instead of should be tried. Hence, what is required is not to have a mini-trial at this stage by having examination and cross- examination and thereafter rendering a decision on the overt act of such person sought to be added. In fact, it is this mini-trial that would affect the right of the person sought to be arraigned as an accused rather than not having any cross-examination at all, for in light of sub-section 4 of Section 319 CrPC, the person would be entitled to a fresh trial where he would have all the rights including the right to cross examine prosecution witnesses and examine defence witnesses and advance his arguments upon the same. Therefore, even on the basis of Examination-in-Chief, the Court or the Magistrate can proceed against a person as SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 11 of 14long as the court is satisfied that the evidence appearing against such person is such that it prima facie necessitates bringing such person to face trial. In fact, Examination-in-Chief untested by Cross Examination, undoubtedly in itself, is an evidence.” 17. Therefore, the complicity of any person sought to be arrayed as an accused can be decided with or without conducting cross-examination of the complainant and other prosecution witnesses, and there is no mandate to decide the application under section 319 CrPC before cross- examination of other witnesses. 18. In the present case, we find that the Trial Court having tried its best to ensure that the prosecution witnesses nos.1, 2 and 3 present themselves for cross-examination and thereafter it would decide the application under section 319 CrPC, the prosecution witnesses repeatedly continued to either absent themselves or file adjournment applications and only insisted for deciding the application under section 319 CrPC first and only thereafter the trial could proceed. The complainant has no such mandatory right to SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 12 of 14insist that an application be decided in such a manner. Even the Public Prosecutor had not supported the complainant’s counsel in filing of the application under section 319 CrPC. The role of the complainant in a trial does not permit it to act as a Public Prosecutor on behalf of the State. The complainant and its counsel have a limited role in a sessions trial in a State case. The High Court failed to take into consideration all these aspects. Why the prosecution witnesses were shying from facing the cross-examination is not understood. Their only insistence was that the parents of the accused should be summoned and dragged into the trial and to somehow or the other keep the trial pending. 19. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the Trial Court was correct in proceeding under section 232 CrPC and accordingly acquitting the appellant- accused, treating it to be a case of no evidence. The Trial court was also correct in rejecting the application under section 319 CrPC for want of admissible evidence on part of the prosecution. SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 13 of 1420. For all the reasons recorded above, the appeal is allowed, the impugned order of the High Court is set aside and that of the Trial Court is restored. ………………………………..……J (VIKRAM NATH) ………………………………..……J (PRASANNA B. VARALE) NEW DELHI OCTOBER 18, 2024 SLP(Crl.) No.12292 of 2022 Page 14 of 14

--- JUDGMENT 185 ---
These are distressing trends indeed. 4. As if there is no end to it, the present case unfolds facts which are equally disturbing and meets with our disapproval. 5. However, before we refer to the factual matrix giving rise to this civil appeal, noticing a decision of fairly recent origin of this Court in Balaji Baliram Mupade vs State of Maharashtra1 is considered imperative. Relevant excerpts from such decision read as follows: “1. … Judicial discipline requires promptness in delivery of judgments—an aspect repeatedly emphasised by this Court. The problem is compounded where the result is known but not the reasons. This deprives any aggrieved party of the opportunity to seek further judicial redressal in the next tier of judicial scrutiny. * * * * * 10. We must note with regret that the counsel extended through various judicial pronouncements including the one referred to aforesaid appear to have been ignored, more importantly where oral orders are pronounced. In case of such orders, it is expected that they are either dictated in the court or at least must follow immediately thereafter, to facilitate any aggrieved party to seek redressal from the higher court. The delay in delivery of judgments has been observed to be a violation of Article 21 of the Constitution 1 (2021) 12 SCC 603 2of India in Anil Rai case [(2001) 7 SCC 318] and as stated aforesaid, the problem gets aggravated when the operative portion is made available early and the reasons follow much later. 11. It cannot be countenanced that between the date of the operative portion of the order and the reasons disclosed, there is a hiatus period of nine months! This is much more than what has been observed to be the maximum time period for even pronouncement of reserved judgment as per Anil Rai case. 12. The appellant undoubtedly being the aggrieved party and prejudiced by the impugned order is unable to avail of the legal remedy of approaching this Court where reasons can be scrutinised. It really amounts to defeating the rights of the appellant to challenge the impugned order on merits and even the succeeding party is unable to obtain the fruits of success of the litigation. 13. We are constrained to pen down a more detailed order and refer to the earlier view on account of the fact that recently a number of such orders have come to our notice and we thought it is time to send a reminder to the High Courts.” 6. We are surprised, not a little, that the strong reminders issued by this Court from time to time have had little effect on the high courts in the country and that decisions, binding under Article 141 of the Constitution, are being persistently ignored. It has been stressed time and again over the years and we feel pained to observe, once more, that neglect/omission/refusal to abide by binding precedents augurs ill for the health of the system. Not only does it tantamount to disservice to the institution of the judiciary but also affects the administration of justice. For a 3learned Judge to deviate from the laid down standards would be to betray the trust reposed in him by the nation. We sincerely hope that learned Judges of the high courts while being careful and cautious will remain committed to the service of the litigants, for whom only they exist, as well as the oath of office that they have taken so that, in future, we are not presented with another case of similar nature to deal with. 7. In this case, which is a civil appeal arising from a judgment and order bearing the date 1st March, 2023, we find the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad2 to have egregiously breached the law. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 186 ---
The bare facts necessary for decision, without any reference to the facts and law involved in the case before the High Court, culled out from the pleadings before us are these. 9. R/Special Civil Application No. 10912 of 20153, being a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, was filed by the appellant before the High Court challenging an order dated 16th June, 2015 passed by the Deputy Collector, Kamrej Prant, District Surat. The Deputy Collector, by such order, had confirmed the order dated 23rd February, 2015 of the Mamlatdar, Kamrej. The petition came up for consideration on 1st March, 2 High Court, hereafter 3 petition, hereafter 42023 before a learned Judge, having been listed in the cause- list as Item No.17. According to the appellant, he was represented before the learned Judge by his counsel. Hearing having concluded on 1st March, 2023, “he was under the belief that the detailed order is reserved in the proceeding. However, even an order recording the reserving of orders has not been passed or made available on the official website of the Hon’ble High Court till date”. Since the detailed order was not pronounced, the appellant’s counsel did not also apply for the certified copy. In the process, more than a year passed by. On 30th April, 2024, the appellant’s counsel received from the IT Cell of the High Court soft copy of a reasoned order dated 1st March, 2023 containing the reasons for dismissal of the petition. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 187 ---
The impugned order is part of the records. At the beginning of the said order, “ORAL ORDER” is printed in bold font, i.e., it is supposed to be an order which has been dictated in open court. However, the appellant has alleged something rather serious : that the learned Judge had passed the reasoned order more than a year after 1st March, 2023 and ante-dated the same to project that the reasoned order was passed on 1st March, 2023. 511. Such allegation prompted us to seek, by an order dated 12th August, 2024, a report4 from the Registrar General of the High Court as to whether the allegation of the appellant that the reasoned order bearing the date 1st March, 2023 was communicated to him for the first time on 30th April, 2024 is correct or not. A report has since been filed by the Registrar General and on perusal thereof, we have found the allegation of the appellant to be substantially correct. It is revealed that the learned Judge dictated the reasoned order on 12th April, 2024 to His Lordship’s personal secretary, whereafter such order was uploaded on the website of the High Court on 30th April, 2024 as well as communicated to the appellant’s counsel by the IT Cell. 12. Having regard to the nature of controversy raised by the appellant, we also had the occasion to witness (on the virtual platform) the recorded version of the proceedings dated 1st March, 2023 before the learned Judge of the High Court. After briefly hearing counsel for the appellant and his adversary, the learned Judge was heard to say, “I will dismiss” and a few seconds thereafter, pronounced the outcome of the petition as “dismissed”. Counsel representing the appellant before the High 4 the report, hereafter 6Court being present could hear what the learned Judge said while his adversary acknowledged that he was “grateful”. Immediately thereafter, the next item on the board was called. This is precisely what happened on 1st March, 2023, while dealing with the petition.

--- JUDGMENT 188 ---
13. There can be no two opinions that if not the appellant, but his counsel certainly did have knowledge of dismissal of the petition by the learned Judge; also, we have no doubt that the appellant feigned complete ignorance and deliberately did not plead that his counsel was well and truly aware of the outcome of the petition moments after hearing stood concluded before the learned Judge. 14. At the same time, from the proceedings of the court of the learned Judge available on the virtual platform, it is patently clear that His Lordship did not even express that the ‘reasons would follow’ for the dismissal of the petition. Not having so expressed, His Lordship practically rendered the court functus officio. We say so because it is not too clear as to whether any order of dismissal was signed by His Lordship on 1st March, 2023, or at any point of time immediately thereafter, although we have noted from the report that the Disposal Log Report of 1st March, 2023 of His Lordship’s court duly recorded that the 7petition stood disposed of. In Vinod Kumar Singh v. Banaras Hindu University5, this Court held that when a judgment is pronounced in open court, parties act on the basis that it is the operative judgment and that signing is a mere formality; however, in exceptional circumstances, an order pronounced in open court can be amended or even altered before the same has been authenticated by the Judge by signing the order but such a course ought to be adopted judicially, sparingly and for adequate reasons and upon putting the parties to notice. Such is not the case here. We are inclined to the view that the learned Judge not having expressed that reasons for the dismissal would follow, His Lordship ceased to retain jurisdiction over the petition and foreclosed assignment of reasons for the dismissal. 15. Assuming that His Lordship were to express that reasons for the dismissal would follow, still there could be no valid reason to write a detailed reasoned order after lapse of a year having expressed “dismissed” and upload such order on the website. No doubt, as per the good practice prevailing in the High Court, the order was communicated to the appellant’s counsel by the IT Cell but that is little consolation in a case of the present nature. 5 (1988) 1 SCC 80 816. Having said thus, and bearing in mind the onerous responsibilities that learned Judges of the high courts across the country have to shoulder on a daily basis, we are persuaded to think that the duty and responsibility of assigning reasons for dismissal of the petition completely escaped the mind of the learned Judge. Perhaps, there is hardly any individual including any Judge who can truly claim to have committed no mistake in his life. It is a feature of human fallibility that people are prone to commit mistakes. It is how lessons that individuals learn from mistakes which facilitate in putting the past behind for moving forward.

--- JUDGMENT 189 ---
17. Nonetheless, we regret to observe that the learned Judge having realised in April, 2024 of having omitted to assign reasons for dismissal of the petition although His Lordship had pronounced “dismissed” in open court proceedings on 1st March, 2023, could have avoided committing an act of indiscretion, by breaching all norms of ethics, in proceeding to assign reasons more than a year later. In accordance with the highest standards of fairness, propriety and discipline, the need of the hour required the learned Judge to bring the matter back on board once again, recall the verbal order of dismissal and place it 9before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court for assigning it to some other Bench for fresh consideration. 18. It cannot be gainsaid that in today’s world, particularly when more and more people are showing interest in court proceedings and there is wide coverage thereof on social media platforms, the presiding officers of courts are equally at the centre of attention as the controversy that is involved and the manner of its resolution. The society expects every Judge of a high court, so to say, to be a model of rectitude, an epitome of unimpeachable integrity and unwavering principles, a champion of moral excellence, and an embodiment of professionalism, who can consistently deliver work of high-quality guaranteeing justice. Although, on the whole, the weight of work on learned Judges of the high courts across the country is immense and the Judges have also been performing commendably despite various odds, instances such as the one under consideration, which we view as nothing more than an aberration, bring disrepute to the judicial system of the country and show the entire judiciary in poor light. This, in our opinion, could have well been avoided with a little bit of care and caution, and deference to the decisions on the point by this Court. 1019. The situation presents us with an opportunity where we feel it expedient to share our thoughts only for the purpose of future guidance to overcome adversity. Having regard to the demands of changing times, one of the significant aspects of judging that has been at the forefront of discussion in many a conference/conclave or legal circle is the need for prompt ‘pronouncement of judgments’. Order XX of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ordains that a judgment can be pronounced, in an open court, either at once or as soon thereafter as may be practicable on a future day. Guided by the principles enshrined in Order XX, number of learned Judges scrupulously follow the same. Learned Judges do come across cases requiring short orders which, in their assessment, may not consume more than 15/20 minutes. These orders are generally dictated in open court immediately after a hearing is over. On the other hand, if in any given case the judgment could justifiably be reserved after hearing of extensive arguments, it would not be proper to criticize a learned Judge if he dictates the judgment in open court notwithstanding the length of time to be taken therefor. As per the ordainment of Order XX, the learned Judge would be perfectly justified in doing so. In such cases, it could roughly take any time between 20 minutes to a couple of/few hours or 11even more spilling over to the next day (in rare cases) to accomplish the task. This approach could result in the board (if it is heavy) getting choked and the remaining cases on the board having slim chances of being considered. As the saying goes, necessity is the mother of invention. The necessity to strike a balance, in turn, has led to an innovative approach (many a times followed even by this Court) which, though not strictly in tune with Order XX, has transitioned into a regular practice by passage of time. This contemplates a rough assessment made by a learned Judge of the time to be taken for dictating a judgment after hearing in a matter is concluded and if, in such assessment, it is likely to take more than 20/25 minutes, the learned Judge proceeds to pronounce the operative part together with the outcome while expressing “reasons to/would follow” and then concludes the exercise of pronouncing the final judgment by providing the reasons as soon as possible thereafter. Having regard to the exploding docket of a majority of the high courts, learned Judges consider it wise and prudent to make optimum use of judicial time by not dictating lengthy judgments in court. This practice, no doubt, seeks to serve a salutary purpose. People unversed with the functioning of the judicial system are perhaps unaware as to how development of 12this practice has contributed to saving of precious judicial time, which the learned Judges invariably devote and utilize for hearing more cases that are on board in the anxiety to consider and decide as many cases as are possible during the scheduled working orders. Burdened though with immense pressure of work and brushing aside fatigue, which is quite likely to develop, the learned Judges after retiring for the day dictate the judgment in their court chambers or in their residential offices either on the same day or within a few days thereafter. The hearing having concluded not too long back, the arguments remain fresh in the mind of the learned Judges and it becomes all the more easy to dictate the judgment. While this approach without a doubt has its own benefits, recent happenings leave us to lament that reasons for the conclusion reached are being placed in the public domain much too late, as in the case of Balaji Baliram Mupade (supra) as well as this case. In an attempt to save time to attend to as many cases as possible, certain learned Judges unwittingly are contributing to justice being delayed in given cases which, concomitantly, have been giving rise to criticism of unpleasant flavours. Critics of such practice (to pronounce the operative part with the outcome and to provide the reasons later in detailed final judgments) could 13and do legitimately argue in favour of reserving judgments as required by the procedural laws if the particular case so demands but as Judges, we know, reserving too many judgments has its own pitfalls. Once the files pile up, it becomes increasingly difficult to remember the minute details of the case and the arguments advanced by the parties in support of their respective cases which leads to a shift to rely on the written notes of arguments. However, if only written notes were enough, there would be no need of oral hearing in court. Additionally, drawing from our experience on the bench, we can safely say that inclination of learned Judges to reserve judgments is invariably the course adopted where cases involving complex and intricate points of law do call upon learned Judges to craft well-researched and well-reasoned judgments. That apart, there are cases arising from recent enactments involving questions of law not having arisen hitherto and consequently such questions have never been answered. Such categories of cases demand the high courts to lay down the law in clear terms for comprehension of all concerned. Obviously, this process is time consuming and the time limit for delivering judgments by the high courts as laid down in Anil Rai 14vs State of Bihar6, at times, is breached. We have full trust and confidence in the learned Judges of the high courts since they are well-equipped to tackle any kind of pressure situation. However, while it would be prudent to leave it to the learned Judges to pick any one of the three options [(i) dictation of the judgment in open court, (ii) reserving the judgment and pronouncing it on a future day, or (iii) pronouncing the operative part and the outcome, i.e., “dismissed” or “allowed” or “disposed of”, while simultaneously expressing that reasons would follow in a detailed final judgment supporting such outcome], it would be in the interest of justice if any learned Judge, who prefers the third option (supra), makes the reasons available in the public domain, preferably within 2 (two) days thereof but, in any case, not beyond 5 (five) days to eliminate any kind of suspicion in the mind of the party losing the legal battle. If the pressure of work is such that in the assessment of the learned Judge the reasons in support of the final judgment cannot be made available, without fail, in 5 (five) days, it would be a better option to reserve the judgment. Also, if the ultimate order would have the effect of changing the status of the parties or the subject matter of the lis, it would always be advisable to 6 (2001) 7 SCC 318 15stick to the course envisaged in Order XX. Since, the fraternity of learned Judges of all the courts are interested to preserve the dignity of the respective judicial institutions with which they are associated, all learned Judges must be mindful of the impact of their actions on the society at large. Dealing with lakhs of litigation is no mean task, but at the same time we must realize that instances do emerge leaving absolutely no margin for error. It is our duty as Judges to stand tall and rise to the challenge. 20. While concluding, we are reminded of the universal truth “to err is human, to forgive is divine” emphasizing the human tendency of committing mistakes and the importance of forgiving a human error. 21. Conscious that we are of learned Judges of the high courts working overtime to render justice to the litigants by conducting judicial proceedings, at times, by sitting in excess of normal working hours, discharging administrative duties in addition to judicial work, etc, and in the process overlooking health issues and sacrificing all pleasures of social life, we need to look at the issue wearing glasses of grace and compassion. As has been held by this Court in Tirupati Balaji Developers (P) Ltd. vs State of Bihar7, in the unified hierarchical judicial structure 7 (2004) 5 SCC 1 16that we have under the Constitution, vertically the Supreme Court is placed over the high courts; but if the Supreme Court and the high courts were thought of as brothers, we as Judges of the apex court in the country remain as the elder brother only to the extent of exercise of appellate jurisdiction. Promoting empathy and understanding by encouraging forgiveness, which is a divine quality transcending human limitation, should be preferred to anything else in the given circumstances, particularly when the learned Judge has not been put on notice and is unable to place His Lordship’s version.

--- JUDGMENT 190 ---
22. We, thus, allow the controversy to rest here. 23. It is now time for us to give our decision. Notwithstanding that the appellant has not been entirely clean in his approach but having regard to the famous words of Lord Hewart, the Lord Chief Justice of England in R. vs Sussex JJ., ex p McCarthy8 that “justice must not only be done, but must also be seen to be done”, meaning thereby that the outcome of proceedings should be visibly just, the impugned order bearing the date 1st March, 2023 has to be set aside which we do hereby order. This 8 (1924) 1 KB 256 17would result in revival of the petition of the appellant and it shall stand restored on the file of the High Court. The Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court is requested to place the petition before the learned Judge currently having the assignment to hear the same. 24. Needless to observe, the petition shall be considered and decided by the High Court uninfluenced by any observation made in the order bearing the date 1st March, 2023. 25. The appeal stands allowed on the aforesaid terms. 26. We make it clear that we have not examined the rival claims on merits. ………………………………………, J.

--- JUDGMENT 191 ---
2. The short question that falls for consideration before this Court is whether the Respondent Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) was justified in rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant, while accepting the Technical bid of the Respondent no. 8 - Company, and declaring it to be successful bidder, though the Respondent no. 8 had not complied with the mandatory requirement of submitting the important documents relating to the qualification criteria as contained in Clause 10 of the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) dated 16.08.2023, and thereby had failed to qualify the Eligibility criteria laid down therein? 13. The Appellant-Banshidhar Construction Private Limited has assailed the Judgment and Order dated 18.07.2024 passed by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2896 of 2024, whereby the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition, confirming the impugned decision dated 06.05.2024 of the Technical Bid Committee of the Respondent-BCCL rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant. 4. The Respondent no.1- BCCL is a subsidiary of Coal India Limited and the Respondent Nos. 2-7 are the authorities/employees of the BCCL. On 16.08.2023 the Respondent no. 1 floated a Tender bearing reference No.

--- JUDGMENT 192 ---
The said Power of Attorney was notarized on 14.11.2023. Accordingly, 2the Appellant participated in the said Tender by submitting its bid on 29.11.2023. 5. The Technical bids of the said Tender were opened on 04.12.2023 and after the evaluation of the same, the Appellant was declared to be technically disqualified on 06.05.2024. As per the Tender Summary Reports dated 07.05.2024, the Technical bid of the Appellant was stated to have been rejected on the ground that it did not comply with the Clause 10 of NIT (Part I/Cover I other important documents (OID) Point No. 02 Appendix II (Power of Attorney for signing of bid.) 6. The Financial bids of the two technically qualified bidders were opened on 07.05.2024 and the Respondent no. 8-Company was declared to be the successful bidder. The Appellant being aggrieved by the said decision of the respondent-BCCL, had filed the Writ Petition before the High Court, which has been dismissed by the High Court vide the impugned order. 7. On 23.08.2024 the Court had issued Notices to the Respondents and the learned counsel appearing for Respondents on caveat, had orally assured the Court that they shall not proceed further with the project in question. In order to have clarity on the decision taken by the Tender Recommendation Committee of the BCCL on 06.05.2024, we had 3called for the original file in respect of the entire tender proceedings from the Respondents nos.1 to 7 vide the order dated 17.09.2024 and the same was produced for our perusal. SUBMISSION BY THE LEARNED ADVOCATES: - 8.

--- JUDGMENT 193 ---
Vikramjit Banerjee, ASG appearing for Respondent no. 1 to 7 justifying the decision of Tender Evaluation Committee rejecting the Technical Bid of the Appellant, submitted that the Power of Attorney was dated 07.11.2023, which was notarized on 14.11.2023, whereas the mandatory bid documents were executed on 13.11.2023, which was not in consonance with clause 10 Part I/Cover 1 (OID) of NIT. According to them, the mandatory bid documents were executed on 13.11.2023, when the Executant had no authority to execute the said bid documents. A person submitting the bid was required to have a valid Power of Attorney in his favour at least on the date on which he was signing and executing the bid documents, and therefore the Appellant did not meet with the Eligibility criteria 5prescribed under the terms of the NIT. They further submitted that during the course of evaluation the Respondent BCCL could seek shortfall documents from the Bidders, but could not permit them to replace the bid documents. So far as Respondent no.8 - Company was concerned, the Tender Committee had sought clarification on 09.04.2024 regarding the Audited Annual Reports, which approach and methodology of the Committee was consistent with the other bidders also who were similarly situated as the Respondent no. 8. The learned Counsels also submitted that as per the settled legal position the project being infrastructure project and of national importance, and the scope of judicial review in the matter of award of Contracts being very limited, the Court may not interface with the same, even if the Court finds that there was total arbitrariness or that the tender was granted in a malafide manner. The ld. Counsels have relied upon catena of decisions to buttress their submissions, which shall be dealt with hereinafter as may be necessary. 10. The learned senior counsel Mr. Balbir Singh appearing for Respondent no. 8 while adopting the submissions made on behalf of Respondent nos. 1 to 7 submitted that the Respondent no. 8 was declared as successful bidder on 10.06.2024 and thereafter the Respondent no.1- 6BCCL and M/s. Simlabahal Coal Mines Private Limited (a Special Purpose Vehicle constituted by the respondent no. 8-company) have also entered into a Coal Mining Agreement dated 27.06.2024. He further submitted that there was no pleading of malafide raised in the Appeal by the Appellant and as per the settled legal position, the Courts should not use magnifying glass while scanning the decision-making process of the authorities to make small mistake to appear like a big blunder. ANALYSIS: - 11. The undisputed facts as discernible from the pleadings and the documents on record and from the submissions made by the learned Counsels for the parties are that the Notice Inviting Tender for the project in question was issued by the Respondent BCCL on 16.08.2023, in response to which, the Appellant and the Respondent No.8 had submitted their respective bid documents. The Appellant Company vide the Board Resolution dated 07.11.2023 had authorised its Director Lalti Devi for the purpose of participating in the tender and a Power Of Attorney dated 07.11.2023 was executed in her favour. The said Power Of Attorney was notarised before the Notary on 14.11.2023. It is also not disputed that the Appellant submitted/uploaded the bid documents on 29.11.2023, that is before the last date of submission, 01.12.2023. It 7is also not disputed that the Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023 and the Appellant was declared technically disqualified on 06.05.2024. The extract of Tender Summary Report dated 07.05.2024 stated in the Column ‘Remarks’ that the Appellant ‘Did not comply with Clause No. 10 of NIT (Part I/ Cover I Other Important Documents (OID) Point No. 02 Appendix II (Power of attorney for signing of bid).” 12. It is also not disputed that the Respondent No.8 had not submitted the scanned copies of the Audited balance sheets required to be submitted as per Clause 10 of the NIT in relation to the financial capacity, while submitting/ uploading the tender documents and that it was only when a clarification was sought from the Respondent No.8 about the shortfall of documents, the said Audited balance sheets were submitted on 17.04.2024, after the Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023. It is further not disputed that the Financial bids of the eligible two technically qualified bidders were opened on 07.05.2024 and the Respondent No.8 Company was found to be the successful bidder. 13. In the instant case the entire controversy centres around the interpretation of the Clause 10 of the NIT dated 16.08.2023, hence the same is reproduced for the sake of convenience.

--- JUDGMENT 194 ---
8“10. For substantiating the Financial Capacity, the Bidders are required to furnish the following information online: (a) Value of Net Worth (to be submitted in Indian Rupees and in the format provided at Annex III of Appendix I of RFB); (b) Value of Total Income in the last 3 (three) financial years as chosen by the Bidder (to be submitted in Indian Rupees and in the format provided at Annex III of Appendix I of RFB); (c) Membership number of the chartered accountant£, where applicable; and (d) Scanned copies of the documents as specified in Paragraph 10 of the NIT, in relation to the Financial Capacity. Note: In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the aforesaid certificates and information shall be submitted in respect of all the Members and the Financial Capacity of the Consortium will be assessed by adding the information so furnished. Bidders shall submit the information in an objective manner confirmed by the uploaded documents. The documents related to the information furnished online, based on which the auto evaluation takes place, will only be considered. If a Bidder uploads any other document, it will not be given any cognizance. A scanned copy of the following documents shall be submitted online by the Bidders in support of the information / declaration furnished by the Bidder at the time of submission of their Bids: Sl. No. Submission of Scanned copy of documents (self- documents certified and notarized/ certified® ) related to to be uploaded by Bidders in qualification support of information / criteria declaration furnished online by the Bidder against each qualification criteria (CONFIRMATORY DOCUMENT) 1. Bidder’s Copy of the Bidder’s Covering Letter, Covering Letter acceptance of the Bid conditions and and acceptance making commitments on the Bidder’s of bid conditions letter head as per proforma (provided at Appendix I of RFB) 9Note: In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the above documents are to be signed by all the Members. 2. Financial i) Certificate having UDIN number Capacity specifying the Net Worth of the Bidder as at the close of the latest financial year among the 3 (three) financial years as chosen by the Bidder, from a chartered accountant based on the financial statements audited by statutory auditor∞ exhibiting the information submitted by the Bidder and confirming that the methodology adopted for calculating the Net Worth conforms to the provisions of the Bidding Documents; ii) Certificate having UDIN number specifying the average Total Income of the Bidder during the last 3 (three) financial years, as chosen by the Bidder, from a chartered accountant based on the financial statements audited by statutory auditor∞ exhibiting the information submitted by the Bidder online and also specifying the methodology adopted for calculating the average Total Income; iii) Audited annual reports of the Bidder for the last 3 (three) financial years, as chosen by the Bidder, comprising of the audited balance sheets and profit and loss accounts of the Bidder. iv) A duly filled in Annex III (provided at Appendix I of RFB). Notes: i. For the purpose of Financial Capacity, the Bidder can choose any 3 (three) financial years from the 4 (four) immediately 10completed consecutive financial years as on the date of invitation of Bids. However, the 3 (three) financial years chosen by the Bidder shall be the same for each Member (in case of Consortium) and the Associate(s), whose Financial Capacity is furnished and relied upon by the Bidder. ii. In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the above documents are to be submitted in respect of all the Members. iii. The Bidder shall submit the documents reflecting the Net Worth of the Associate(s) whose Technical Capacity and/or Financial Capacity is furnished and relied upon. 3. Integrity Duly signed and witnessed integrity pact pact as per proforma provided at Appendix VIII of RFB. Note: In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the integrity pact is to be signed by all the Members. ∞In jurisdictions that do not have statutory auditors, the firm of auditors which audits the annual accounts of the Bidder may provide the certificates required under this RFB. £Any approximate equivalent of a chartered accountant may provide the relevant certificates required under this RFB. Jurisdictions which do not have a license/ certification/ membership requirement for accountants to describe themselves or to practice as chartered accountants (or any approximate equivalent), any qualified accountant may provide the certificates required under this RFB. ® For a power of attorney executed and issued overseas, the document will also have to be legalised by the Indian Embassy and notarised in the jurisdiction where the power of attorney is being issued. However, the 11power of attorney provided by Bidders/ Members from countries that have signed the Hague Convention, 1961 are not required to be legalised by the Indian Embassy if it carries a conforming Apostille certificate. 4. Authorization for a) If the Bidder itself is the DSC Digital Signature holder bidding online, then self- Certificate declaration of the Bidder to this effect; (“DSC”) or b) If the DSC holder is bidding online on behalf of the bidder then the power of attorneyβ granted by the Bidder, evidencing authorization granted to the DSC holder to submit the Bid on behalf of the Bidder. 5. Undertaking in An undertaking is to be given by the Support of the Bidder as per the format given at authenticity of Enclosure I of this NIT, confirming the submitted genuineness of the information information and furnished online, authenticity of documents and scanned copy of documents other uploaded and such other commitments declarations. Note: In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the undertaking is to be signed by all the Members. (Original undertaking shall be submitted as per the provisions of NIT) 6.Any other document to support the qualification information as submitted by the Bidder online. Note: Only one file in .pdf format can be uploaded against each qualification criteria. Any additional/ other relevant documents to support the information/declaration furnished by Bidder online against qualification criteria may also be added by the Bidder in the same file (in .pdf format) to be uploaded against respective qualification criteria. 12Part-1/Cover-1-Other Important Documents ("OID”) Sl. No. Criteria Scanned copy of documents (self-certified and notarized/ certified® ) to be uploaded by Bidder in support of information/ declaration furnished online by the Bidder against each criteria (CONFIRMATORY DOCUMENT) 1. Legal status of Documents to be submitted as the Bidder applicable: 1. Affidavit or any other document to prove the proprietorship/ individual status of the Bidder (applicable only where the Bidder is an individual or sole proprietor); 2. Partnership deed/ agreement containing name of partners and Certificate of Incorporation (applicable only where the Bidder is a partnership firm or a limited liability partnership); 3. Memorandum and Articles of Association with certificate of incorporation containing name of Bidder or any similar charter/ constitutional documents (applicable where the Bidder is a company); 4. Appropriate documents as applicable for any other Bidder not mentioned above. 5. Annex I (Appendix I of RFB) duly filled in and uploaded 6. In case of Consortium: (i) Details of all Member(s) as at 1/2/3 (as applicable) above, (ii) Joint Bidding Agreement as per format provided at Appendix IV of RFB: (iii) Annex I (Appendix I of RFB) duly filled in and uploaded; (iv) Annex IV (Appendix I of RFB) duly filled in and uploaded 137. An undertaking in the format given in Enclosure-III with respect to the ultimate beneficial ownership of the Bidder/Members, in light of the General Financial Rules, 2017 read with the OM No. F.

--- JUDGMENT 195 ---
No. 6/18/2019- PPD dated 23rd July 2020 the Consolidated FDI Policy (effective from 15th October 2020) and the Press Note No. 3 (2020 Series) dated 17th April 2020 issued by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (FDI Policy Section), Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India, each as amended or supplemented from time to time. 8. GST registration certificate. 2. Power of As per the format annexed as attorneyβ Appendix II (as applicable) and Appendix III (in case the Bidder is a Consortium) 3. Mandate Form Copy of mandate form duly filled in as for Electronic per proforma provided at Enclosure II Fund Transfer of this NIT 4. Any other document to support the qualification information as submitted by the Bidder online. 14. It is pertinent to note that the Request For Bid (RFB) annexed to the NIT, contained “Instructions to Bidders” in Section II thereof. The Clause 2.1.6 of the said Instructions stated that non-compliance with any of the bidding instructions may lead to rejection of the Bid. Further, Clause 2.2.5 thereof specifically stated that the Bidder shall furnish the requisite documents listed in Paragraphs 9 and Paragraphs 10 of NIT. 1415. From the bare perusal of the afore stated Clause 10, it clearly transpires that the Bidders were required to furnish the information and the scanned copies of the documents relating to qualification criteria particularly to substantiate their Financial capacity. For the purpose of substantiating Financial Capacity, the Bidders were obliged to submit the scanned copies (self-certified and notarised/certified) of the Audited Annual Reports for the last three financial years as chosen by the Bidder, comprising of the audited balance sheets and profit and loss accounts of the Bidder, along with other documents as stated therein. This was the mandatory requirement of the NIT, the same being related to the qualification criteria as also transpiring from Clause 2.2.5 of the RFB. 16. Admittedly, the Respondent No.8 had not submitted the scanned copies of its audited Annual Reports for the last three financial years, at the time of submitting/uploading the bid documents, before the last date fixed i.e 01.12.2023 and the same were submitted on 17.04.2024 only when the clarification was sought from the Respondent No.8, after the Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023. 17. When the Technical bid of the Appellant was rejected by the Respondents on 06.05.2024 on the ground that it did not comply with 15the Clause 10 of the NIT namely Part I/ Cover I Other Important Documents (OID) Point No. 02 Appendix II (Power of attorney for signing of bid), there was no justification on the part of the Respondent authorities for accepting the Technical bid of the Respondent No.8, which clearly was not in compliance with the same mandatory Clause 10 of NIT. The Respondent BCCL has miserably failed to justify as to how the Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 was accepted when it had not submitted the requisite important documents related to the qualification criteria as mentioned in Clause 10 of the NIT. 18. A lame submission was made on behalf of the Respondent BCCL that the Tender Evaluation Committee could call for the shortfall of documents and could not allow replacement of the documents, and that the Respondent no.8 was asked to submit the shortfall documents only. We are neither impressed nor can accept the said submissions. Further, apart from the fact that the Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 deserved to be rejected at the threshold for non-compliance of Clause 10 of NIT, there was also no legal and justifiable reason for rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant. Admittedly when the tender documents were submitted by the Appellant, the Power Of Attorney authorising the concerned signatory to act on behalf of the Appellant was duly 16notarised. Merely because the bid documents were signed on 13.11.2023 by the authorized signatory Ms. Lalti Devi on the basis of the Power of Attorney executed in her favour on 07.11.2023, and the said Power Of Attorney was notarised on 14.11.2023, it could not be said that the said representative of the Appellant Company did not possess the requisite authority to submit the documents on the day when the bid documents were submitted, nor could it be said that there was any non-compliance of the mandatory requirement of the Clause 10 of the NIT as sought to be projected by the Respondent BCCL. It was nowhere stated in the NIT that the Power Of Attorney had to be notarised before signing the bid documents. As per Part-1/Cover I of Clause 10 of NIT, pertaining to the other important documents, the only requirement was to furnish the scanned copies of documents (self certified and notarised/certified) to be uploaded by the bidder in support of the information/declaration furnished online by the Bidder against each criteria, and against the criteria for Power Of Attorney, it was stated that it should be as per the format annexed. The Power Of Attorney submitted by the Appellant was as per the format and duly notarised on 14.11.2023, and all the requisite documents along with notarised POA were submitted before the last date fixed for submission. 1719. It would be apposite to note that as per Section 2 of the Power Of Attorney Act, 1882, the donee of a power-of-attorney may, if he thinks fit, execute or do any instrument or thing in and with his own name and signature, and his own seal, where sealing is required, by the authority of the donor of the power; and every instrument and thing so executed and done, shall be as effectual in law as if it had been executed or done by the donee of the power in the name, and with the signature and seal, of the donor thereof. In the instant case, the POA was duly executed in favour of the donee, the signatory of the documents, and was duly notarised before its submission along with other important documents required to be submitted as per the NIT by the Appellant, before the last date of submission fixed by the Respondent BCCL. Hence, there was no legal or justifiable ground to reject the Technical bid of the Appellant. 20. Thus, the said action of the Respondent BCCL in rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant on absolutely extraneous ground and accepting the Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 though submitted in utter non- compliance of the mandatory requirement of Clause 10 of the NIT, and subsequently calling upon the Respondent no.8 to furnish the shortfall of documents after the opening of technical bids of the Bidders, was totally arbitrary and illegal. 1821. There cannot be any disagreement to the legal proposition propounded in catena of decisions of this Court relied upon by the learned counsels for the Respondents to the effect that the Court does not sit as a Court of Appeal in the matter of award of contracts and it merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made; and that the Government and its instrumentalities must have a freedom of entering into the contracts. However, it is equally well settled that the decision of the government/ its instrumentalities must be free from arbitrariness and must not be affected by any bias or actuated by malafides. Government bodies being public authorities are expected to uphold fairness, equality and public interest even while dealing with contractual matters. Right to equality under Article 14 abhors arbitrariness. Public authorities have to ensure that no bias, favouritism or arbitrariness are shown during the bidding process and that the entire bidding process is carried out in absolutely transparent manner. 22. At this juncture, we may reiterate the well-established tenets of law pertaining to the scope of judicial intervention in Government contracts. 1923. In Sterling Computers Limited vs. M/s. M & N Publications Limited and Others1, this Court while dealing with the scope of judicial review of award of contracts held: - “18. While exercising the power of judicial review, in respect of contracts entered into on behalf of the State, the Court is concerned primarily as to whether there has been any infirmity in the “decision making process”. In this connection reference may be made to the case of Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans [(1982) 3 All ER 141] where it was said that: (p. 144a) “The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment, and not to ensure that the authority, after according fair treatment, reaches on a matter which it is authorised or enjoined by law to decide for itself a conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the court.” By way of judicial review the court cannot examine the details of the terms of the contract which have been entered into by the public bodies or the State. Courts have inherent limitations on the scope of any such enquiry. But at the same time as was said by the House of Lords in the aforesaid case, Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans [(1982) 3 All ER 141] the courts can certainly examine whether “decision-making process” was reasonable, rational, not arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.” 24. In Tata Cellular vs. Union of India2, this Court had laid down certain priniciples for the judicial review of administrative action. “94. The principles deducible from the above are: (1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action. 1 (1993) 1 SCC 445 2 (1994) 6 SCC 651 20(2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made. (3) The court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision. If a review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible. (4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract. Normally speaking, the decision to accept the tender or award the contract is reached by process of negotiations through several tiers. More often than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by experts. (5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not only be tested by the application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides. (6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure. Based on these principles we will examine the facts of this case since they commend to us as the correct principles.” 25. It has also been held in ABL International Limited and Another vs. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited and Others3, as under: - “53. From the above, it is clear that when an instrumentality of the State acts contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or statutory obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee found in Article 14 of the Constitution.” 3 (2004) 3 SCC 553 2126. In Jagdish Mandal vs. State of Orissa and Others4, this Court after discussing number of judgments laid down two tests to determine the extent of judicial interference in tender matters. They are: - “22. (i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide or intended to favour someone; or Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can say: “the decision is such that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with relevant law could have reached;” (ii) Whether public interest is affected. If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference under Article 226. Cases involving blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on a tenderer/contractor or distribution of State largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships and franchises) stand on a different footing as they may require a higher degree of fairness in action.” 27. In Mihan India Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 196 ---
vs. GMR Airports Ltd. and Others5, while observing that the government contracts granted by the government bodies must uphold fairness, equality and rule of law while dealing with the contractual matters, it was observed in Para 50 as under: - “50. In view of the above, it is apparent that in government contracts, if granted by the government bodies, it is expected to uphold fairness, equality and rule of law while dealing with contractual matters. Right to equality under Article 14 of the Constitution of India abhors arbitrariness. The transparent bidding process is favoured by the Court to ensure that constitutional requirements are satisfied. It is said that the constitutional guarantee as provided under Article 14 of the Constitution of India demands the State to act in a fair and 4(2007) 14 SCC 517 5(2022) SCC Online SC 574 22reasonable manner unless public interest demands otherwise. It is expedient that the degree of compromise of any private legitimate interest must correspond proportionately to the public interest.” 28. It was sought to be submitted by the learned Counsels for the Respondents relying upon the observations made in Central Coalfields Limited and Another vs. SLL-SML (Joint Venture Consortium) and Others6, that whether a term of NIT is essential or not is a decision taken by the employer which should be respected. However, in the said judgment also it is observed that if the employer has exercised the inherent authority to deviate from the essential term, such deviation has to be made applicable to all the bidders and potential bidders. It was observed in Para 47 and 48 as under: - “47. The result of this discussion is that the issue of the acceptance or rejection of a bid or a bidder should be looked at not only from the point of view of the unsuccessful party but also from the point of view of the employer. As held in Ramana Dayaram Shetty [Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489] the terms of NIT cannot be ignored as being redundant or superfluous. They must be given a meaning and the necessary significance. As pointed out in Tata Cellular [Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 651] there must be judicial restraint in interfering with administrative action. Ordinarily, the soundness of the decision taken by the employer ought not to be questioned but the decision-making process can certainly be subject to judicial review. The soundness of the decision may be questioned if it is irrational or mala fide or intended to favour someone or a decision “that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with relevant law could have reached” as held 6 (2016) 8 SCC 622 23in Jagdish Mandal [Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517] followed in Michigan Rubber [Michigan Rubber (India) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2012) 8 SCC 216]. 48. Therefore, whether a term of NIT is essential or not is a decision taken by the employer which should be respected. Even if the term is essential, the employer has the inherent authority to deviate from it provided the deviation is made applicable to all bidders and potential bidders as held in Ramana Dayaram Shetty [Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489] . However, if the term is held by the employer to be ancillary or subsidiary, even that decision should be respected. The lawfulness of that decision can be questioned on very limited grounds, as mentioned in the various decisions discussed above, but the soundness of the decision cannot be questioned, otherwise this Court would be taking over the function of the tender issuing authority, which it cannot.” 29. The submissions made by the learned Counsels for the Respondents that the project in question being Infrastructure project and also one of the Mega projects, this Court may not interfere more particularly in view of the fact that agreement has already been entered into between the Respondent BCCL and the Special Purpose Vehicle of the Respondent no.8, cannot be accepted, when we have found that the impugned decision of the Respondent BCCL was grossly arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. As held earlier, the Government bodies/ instrumentalities are expected to act in absolutely fair, reasonable and transparent manner, particularly in the award of contracts for Mega projects. Any element of arbitrariness 24or discrimination may lead to hampering of the entire project which would not be in the public interest.

--- JUDGMENT 197 ---
The only question which was framed for consideration by this Court was in the following terms: “3. The short legal question which arises for this Court's consideration is whether the Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988 (for short “the 1988 Act”), as amended by the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016 (for short “the 2016 Act”) has a prospective effect. Although a purely legal question arises in this appeal, it is necessary to have a brief factual background in mind before we advert to the analysis.” 1 (2023) 3 SCC 315 13 The conclusion which was arrived at by the Court, was in the following terms: “127.1.Section 3(2) (sic Section 3) of the unamended 1988 Act is declared as unconstitutional for being manifestly arbitrary. Accordingly, Section 3(2) of the 2016 Act is also unconstitutional as it is violative of Article 20(1) of the Constitution. 127.2. In rem forfeiture provision under Section 5 of the unamended 1988 Act, prior to the 2016 Amendment Act, was unconstitutional for being manifestly arbitrary. 127.3. The 2016 Amendment Act was not merely procedural, rather, prescribed substantive provisions. 127.4. In rem forfeiture provision under Section 5 of the 2016 Act, being punitive in nature, can only be applied prospectively and not retroactively. 127.5. The authorities concerned cannot initiate or continue criminal prosecution or confiscation proceedings for transactions entered into prior to the coming into force of the 2016 Act viz. 25-10-2016. As a consequence of the above declaration, all such prosecutions or confiscation proceedings shall stand quashed. 127.6. As this Court is not concerned with the constitutionality of such independent forfeiture proceedings contemplated under the 2016 Amendment Act on the other grounds, the aforesaid questions are left open to be adjudicated in appropriate proceedings.” 4 The Court has declared Section 3(2) of the unamended provisions of the Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act 1988 as unconstitutional for being manifestly arbitrary and as violative of Article 20(1) of the Constitution. The provisions of Section 5 of the unamended Act, prior to the Amendment of 2016, have been declared to be unconstitutional on the ground that they are manifestly arbitrary. 5 It is not disputed that there was no challenge to the constitutional validity of the unamended provisions. This is also clear from the formulation of the question 2which arose for consideration before the Bench in paragraph 3 of the judgment, which has been extracted above. In the submissions of parties which have been recorded in the judgment, the issue of constitutional validity was not squarely addressed. 6 A challenge to the constitutional validity of a statutory provision cannot be adjudicated upon in the absence of a lis and contest between the parties. We accordingly allow the review petition and recall the judgment dated 23 August 2022. Civil Appeal No 5783 of 2022 shall stand restored to file for fresh adjudication before a Bench to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India on the administrative side. 7 Where any other proceedings have been disposed of by relying on the judgment of this Court in Ganpati Dealcom Private Ltd (supra), liberty is granted to the aggrieved party to seek a review in view of the present judgment. 8 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.

--- JUDGMENT 198 ---
Respondent(s) (WITH IA No. 17066/2023 - EARLY HEARING APPLICATION, IA No. 163121/2022 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES, IA No. 163115/2022 - STAY APPLICATION) WITH SLP(C) No. 15079/2024 (XII) (FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.139136/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.139137/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) SLP(C) No. 17573/2024 (XIV) (FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.133559/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.133560/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) SLP(C) No. 14897/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.131794/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT, IA No. 131794/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) SLP(C) No. 14898/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.139622/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT, IA No. 139622/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 27030/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.187819/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.187821/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT and IA No.187820/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN REFILING / CURING THE DEFECTS) Diary No(s). 29027/2024 (III) (FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.163374/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.163375/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 32360/2024 (III) 4(WITH IA No.186219/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.186214/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 33397/2024 (III) (FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.192799/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.192800/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) SLP(C) No. 22369/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.208197/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.208196/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 38691/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.225956/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.225957/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 39495/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.222694/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.222693/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 39919/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.230170/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.230171/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40165/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.220601/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.220600/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40204/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.226097/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.226098/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40208/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.217588/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.217589/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40209/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.224078/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.224079/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40212/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No. 229940/2024 - CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING, IA No. 229942/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40627/2024 (III) (WITH IA No.214801/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.214796/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40707/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.226347/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA 5No.226348/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 40913/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No.220124/2024-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.220125/2024-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 41598/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No. 231878/2024 - CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING, IA No. 231879/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Diary No(s). 44254/2024 (XII) (WITH IA No. 230517/2024 - CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING, IA No. 230516/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT) Date : 18-10-2024 These matters were called on for hearing today. CORAM : HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE HON'BLE MR.

--- JUDGMENT 199 ---
4. An FIR4 was lodged on 22nd April, 2024 for the offences punishable under Sections 294, 323, 506, 447, 147, 148, and Section 458 of the Indian Penal Code, 18605 at Police Station Road, Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh. The complainant alleged that the appellants, along with others, had forcefully entered into his property after breaking a wall and assaulted his family members. In pursuance of the same, the appellants were arrested on 27th April, 2024. The appellant's First Bail Application6 was dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 29th May, 2024, with liberty to renew the prayer after the chargesheet was filed. The chargesheet was filed against the appellants on 20th June, 2024 under Sections 294, 323, 506, 447, 147, 148, 458, 149 and Section 326 IPC. 3 Mr. Ghanshyam Lashkari 4 FIR No. 539 of 2024 5 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘IPC’ 6 M.Cr.C. No. 22301 of 2024Thereafter, the appellants preferred a Second Bail Application7, which came to be allowed vide the impugned order with the following observations: “5 .Prayer is vehemently opposed by the counsel for the objector and it is submitted that as per the complainant’s information, they have still not received the keys of the disputed property and even otherwise, since the accused persons have already sealed the gates by constructing a wall, and the entry in the aforesaid house is from the premises of the accused persons only, hence, the complainant would not be able to enter into the premises. 6. Counsel for the State, on the other hand, has submitted that as per information received, the disputed property is of the government only, and the keys are lying with the Collector, Ratlam. However, it is also submitted that the keys were handed over to the SHO of the concerned Police station by the Mahant of Ramsuchi Sampradayas. 7. Be that as it may, this Court is of the considered opinion that since the applicants are already in jail since 27.04 2024 and they have already handed over the possession of the property to the concerned police station. In such circumstances, respondent/State is directed to remove the wall in front of the gates facing the road at the expense of the applicants, and its keys be also handed over to the complainant positively within a period of 15 days. Needless to say that the accused persons shall not interfere in the possession of the registered owner of the property, which is in the name of the complainant Ghanshyam Lashkari, and shall also bear the expenses of clearing the main gates of the house facing the road.” 8. In view of the aforesaid, without commenting on the merits of the case, the application filed by the applicants is hereby allowed. The applicants are directed to be released on bail upon furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/-(Rupees Fifty Thousand) each with separate solvent surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court for their regular appearance before the trial Court during trial with a condition that they shall remain present before the court concerned during trial and shall 7 M.Cr.C. No.

--- JUDGMENT 200 ---
27154 of 2024also abide by the conditions enumerated under Section437(3) Criminal Procedure Code,1973. ” (Emphasis supplied) 5. The appellants have filed the present appeal challenging the onerous conditions imposed by the High Court while granting the bail to them vide the impugned order. 6. Learned counsel representing the appellants submitted that the conditions imposed by the High Court are excessive and beyond the scope of bail proceedings. 7. It was submitted that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction under Section 437(3) and Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19738 by imposing onerous conditions that goes beyond ensuring the presence of the accused during investigation and trial. 8. It was further submitted that the High Court's order to hand over the keys of the disputed property to the complainant has prejudiced the ongoing Civil Suit9 between the State of Madhya Pradesh and the complainant, his wife, and Mahant Pushpraj 8 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘CrPC’ 9 RCSA No. 2019 of 2024, for declaration and permanent injunction against the complainant [Ghanshyam Lashkari], his wife [Durga Lashkari] and Mahant Pushparaj seeking cancellation of a deed dated 21.07.2011.titled “Government of Madhya Pradesh through Collector, Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh v. Mrs. Durga Lashkari and Ors.”. 9. Learned standing counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh affirmed that a Civil Suit10 is pending between the State and the complainant, his wife, and Mahant Pushpraj in which the State has sought a declaration of title and permanent injunction. As per the learned counsel for the State, while deciding the bail application, the High Court ought not to have ventured into the civil dispute inter se between the parties, as the order to deliver the possession of the property to the complainant(who is the defendant in the pending suit for title declaration), is bound to have prejudicial consequences on the civil rights of the parties. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 201 ---
Mr. Puneet Jain, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the complainant vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the appellant's counsel. He urged that looking at the fact that the appellants had forcibly broken into the premises of the complainant being the registered owner of the property and caused injuries to him and his family members, the High Court was fully justified in imposing the conditions as set out 10 Supra, Note 9in the impugned order, while extending indulgence of bail to the appellants. 11. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The issue that requires our attention is as to whether the High Court exceeded the jurisdiction conferred upon it by Section 439 CrPC by imposing onerous and unreasonable conditions unrelated to the grant of bail, to be specific, the direction for removal of the wall at the expense of the appellants and handing over possession of the disputed property to the complainant. 12. The fundamental purpose of bail is to ensure the accused's presence during the investigation and trial. Any conditions imposed must be reasonable and directly related to this objective. This Court in “Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla v. State of Maharastra and Another11” observed that though the competent court is empowered to exercise its discretion to impose “any condition” for the grant of bail under Sections 437(3) and 439(1)(a) CrPC, the discretion of the court has to be guided by the need to facilitate the administration of justice, secure the presence of the accused and ensure that the liberty of the accused is not misused 11 (2020) 10 SCC 77to impede the investigation, overawe the witnesses or obstruct the course of justice. The relevant observations are extracted herein below: “14. The language of Section 437(3) CrPC which uses the expression “any condition … otherwise in the interest of justice” has been construed in several decisions of this Court. Though the competent court is empowered to exercise its discretion to impose “any condition” for the grant of bail under Sections 437(3) and 439(1)(a) CrPC, the discretion of the court has to be guided by the need to facilitate the administration of justice, secure the presence of the accused and ensure that the liberty of the accused is not misused to impede the investigation, overawe the witnesses or obstruct the course of justice. Several decisions of this Court have dwelt on the nature of the conditions which can legitimately be imposed both in the context of bail and anticipatory bail.” (Emphasis supplied) 13. In Sumit Mehta v. State (NCT of Delhi) 12, this Court discussed the scope of the discretion of the Court to impose “any condition” on the grant of bail and observed in the following terms:- “15. The words “any condition” used in the provision should not be regarded as conferring absolute power on a court of law to impose any condition that it chooses to impose. Any condition has to be interpreted as a reasonable condition acceptable in the facts permissible in the circumstance and effective in the pragmatic sense and should not defeat the order of grant of bail. We are of the view that the present facts and circumstances of the case do not warrant such extreme condition to be imposed.” (Emphasis supplied) 12 (2013) 15 SCC 57014. This Court in Dilip Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Another13, laid down the factors to be taken into consideration while deciding the application for bail and observed: “4. It is well settled by a plethora of decisions of this Court that criminal proceedings are not for realisation of disputed dues. It is open to a court to grant or refuse the prayer for anticipatory bail, depending on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. The factors to be taken into consideration, while considering an application for bail are the nature of accusation and the severity of the punishment in the case of conviction and the nature of the materials relied upon by the prosecution; reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witnesses or apprehension of threat to the complainant or the witnesses; reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the time of trial or the likelihood of his abscondence; character, behaviour and standing of the accused; and the circumstances which are peculiar or the accused and larger interest of the public or the State and similar other considerations. A criminal court, exercising jurisdiction to grant bail/anticipatory bail, is not expected to act as a recovery agent to realise the dues of the complainant, and that too, without any trial.” (Emphasis supplied) 15. In Mahesh Chandra v. State of U.P. and Others , this 14 Court observed that while deciding a bail application, it is not the jurisdiction of the Court to decide civil disputes as between the parties. The relevant part is extracted hereinbelow: “3. As a condition for grant of anticipatory bail, the High Court has recorded the undertaking of the petitioners to pay to the victim daughter-in-law a sum of Rs 2000 per month and failure to do so would result in vacation of the order 13 (2021) 2 SCC 779 14 (2006) 6 SCC 196granting bail. We notice that the applicants before the High Court were the jeth and jethani of the victim. We fail to understand how they can be made liable to deposit Rs 2000 per month for the maintenance of the victim. Moreover, while deciding a bail application, it is not the jurisdiction of the court to decide civil disputes as between the parties. We, therefore, remit the matter to the High Court to consider the bail application afresh on merit and to pass an appropriate order without imposing any condition of the nature imposed by the impugned order. (Emphasis supplied) 16. This Court has consistently emphasised that the Court's discretion in imposing conditions must be guided by the need to facilitate the administration of justice, secure the accused's presence, and prevent the misuse of liberty to impede the investigation or obstruct justice. 17. Having gone through the impugned order, particularly the observations made by the High Court in paragraphs 5, 6, and 715, we find that while the Second Bail application of the appellants was under consideration, it was the police who took possession of the keys of the immovable property under an alleged voluntary application filed by the Mahant of Ram Suchi Sampradaya. We believe that this action by the police to take possession of immovable property reflects total lawlessness. Under no circumstances, can the police be allowed to interfere with the 15 Supra, Para 4possession of immovable property, as such action does not bear sanction by any provision of law. 18. Therefore, we conclude that the High Court has clearly exceeded its jurisdiction in para 7 of the impugned order by imposing the conditions of demolishing the wall at the expense of the appellants and handing over the possession of the disputed property to the complainant. 19. In this case, the conditions imposed clearly tantamount to deprivation of civil rights, rather than measures to ensure the accused's presence during trial. Therefore, the conditions imposed by the High Court in the highlighted extract of paragraph 716 of the impugned order, are hereby set aside. 20. We further make it clear that none of the observations made in the order dated 25th July, 2024, or this order shall prejudice the rights of the parties in the pending civil suit17. 21. The appellants shall continue to remain on bail upon furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs. 50,000/- each, with one surety of the like amount, to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 16 Supra, Para 4 17 Supra, Note 922. The other conditions imposed by the High Court shall remain in force. 23. The appeal is allowed in these terms. No costs. 24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. Criminal Appeal @ SLP(Criminal) Diary No. 40532/2024 25. Permission to file special leave petition is granted. 26. Leave granted. 27. The appeal is allowed in terms of the judgment passed in Criminal Appeal @ SLP(Crl.) No. 10773 of 2024.

--- JUDGMENT 202 ---
2. On 19th March 2018, while issuing notice, this Court passed the following order: “ Delay condoned. The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the petitioner – Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 2 of 13CBI submits that the respondent has not deposited the fine. The submission is recorded. Issue notice.” On 8th August 2023, the following order was passed: “ The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent, on instructions, states that the respondent will deposit in this Court a sum of Rs.15 lakhs within three months from today. Only in view of this statement, we adjourn this petition till 21.11.2023 to be listed on the top of the Board. We make it clear that on the failure of the respondent to deposit the said amount, the order granting bail to the respondent is liable to be set aside. As and when the said amount is deposited, the Registry will invest it in the interest bearing deposit with auto renewal facility.” In terms of the said order, the respondent has deposited a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­, which has been invested in a fixed deposit under the orders of this Court. SUBMISSIONS 3. Shri K M Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of India, pointed out that the finding against the Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 3 of 13respondent and co­accused by the Special Court is that there was an embezzlement of approximately a sum of Rs.46,00,000/­. He pointed out that what is suspended under the impugned order is the substantive sentence of 7 years. As the respondent has paid only a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­ out of the total fine amount of Rs.95,00,000/­ and as the direction to pay a fine has not been suspended under the impugned order, the respondent will have to be taken into custody for undergoing sentence imposed in default of payment of a fine. Learned ASG relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Satyendra Kumar Mehra v.

--- JUDGMENT 203 ---
State of Jharkhand1. He pointed out the interpretation put by this Court to Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the CrPC’). He relied upon what is held in paragraph 36 of the said decision. He urged that there is a power to suspend the fine conferred by Section 389 of the CrPC with or without condition. He submitted that the impugned order does not record that the order of fine has been suspended. He, therefore, submitted that the impugned order would not help the respondent to avoid enforcement of the sentence in default of payment of the fine. He submitted that, in any case, the High Court could not have granted an 1 (2018) 15 SCC 139 Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 4 of 13unconditional stay of the order directing payment of a fine of Rs.95,00,000/­. He submitted that until the impugned order was passed, the respondent had only been incarcerated for about 8 months. 4. Shri Naidu, learner senior counsel representing the respondent, submitted that the entire sentence, including the sentence of fine, has been suspended by the impugned order. He submitted that the substantive sentence and the sentence in default of fine are limited period sentences. As the appeal against conviction is not likely to be heard in the near future, the High Court has rightly suspended the sentence. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 5. Section 389 of the CrPC reads thus: “389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail.— (1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or order appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail, or on his own bond: Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who is Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 5 of 13convicted of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release: Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail. (2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may be exercised also by the High Court in the case of an appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate thereto. (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, the Court shall, — (i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or (ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail, order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub­section (1); and the sentence of imprisonment shall, Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 6 of 13so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended. (4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so sentenced.” The power of suspension of sentence under Section 389 of the CrPC (Corresponding to Section 430 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) is vested in the Appellate Court dealing with an appeal against the order of conviction. On a plain reading of sub­section (1), the Appellate Court has the power to suspend the execution of a sentence or order appealed against. If the appellant/accused is in confinement, there is a power vesting in the Appellate Court to release him on bail pending the final disposal of the appeal. In case of offences covered by the first proviso to sub­section (1) of Section 389, there is a mandate to give an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor to show cause in writing against such release before releasing a convicted person on bail. As stated earlier, the substantive sentence imposed on the respondent is rigorous imprisonment for seven years. In addition, there is a direction to pay a fine of Rs.95,00,000/­. There are five kinds of punishment Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 7 of 13provided in Section 53 in Chapter III of the IPC, which reads thus: “53. “Punishments”.—The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code are— First—Death; Secondly—Imprisonment for life; Thirdly— [* * *]; Fourthly—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely: — (1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour; (2) Simple; Fifthly—Forfeiture of property; Sixthly—Fine.” Section 64, which is a part of the same chapter III, reads thus: “64. Sentence of imprisonment for non­payment of fine­ In every case, of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without imprisonment, and in every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, It shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 8 of 13suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.” (emphasis added) Sections 4 and 8(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, are the corresponding Sections. Section 64 of IPC uses the expression ‘offender is sentenced to a fine’. Moreover, the fine is one of the five punishments provided in Section 53. Thus, it is evident that the direction to pay a fine issued against the convicted accused is also a sentence. Under Section 64, the Court is empowered to direct that in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a specific term as directed therein. Therefore, there can be a sentence of fine and a further sentence in default of compliance with the sentence of fine. 6. In paragraph no.36 of the decision of this Court in the case of Satyendra Kumar Mehra1, this Court held thus: “36. We, however, make it clear that the appellate court while exercising power under Section 389 CrPC can suspend the sentence of imprisonment as well as of Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 9 of 13fine without any condition or with conditions. There are no fetters on the power of the appellate court while exercising jurisdiction under Section 389 CrPC. The appellate court could have suspended the sentence and fine both or could have directed for deposit of fine or part of fine.” Thus, while convicting an accused, if a direction is issued against him to pay a fine, such a direction can be suspended in the exercise of power under sub­section (1) of Section 389 of the CrPC. 7. Coming back to the impugned order, it is clearly mentioned therein that the respondent's sentence stands suspended pending the hearing of the appeal subject to compliance of furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/­. Perusal of the impugned order shows that the High Court was conscious of the fact that as the embezzlement alleged against the respondent and other accused persons was to the tune of Rs.46,00,000/­, the Special Court had sentenced the respondent to pay a fine of Rs.95,00,000/­. The order notes that the sentence imposed on the respondent was of both imprisonment and payment of fine. Therefore, on a plain reading of the impugned order, the argument of learned ASG that the sentence of the fine was not suspended cannot be accepted. Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 10 of 138. While suspending the sentence, especially the sentence of fine, the Appellate Court can impose conditions. Whether the order of suspension of the sentence of fine should be conditional or unconditional depends on the facts of each case and especially the nature of the offence. For example, when there is a sentence of fine imposed while convicting an accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, depending upon the facts of the case, the Appellate Court may impose a condition of depositing the fine amount or part thereof while suspending the sentence. However, the approach of the Court may be different in case of offences punishable under the IPC and cognate legislations. Whenever a prayer is for suspension of the sentence of fine, the Appellate Court must consider whether the sentence of fine can be suspended unconditionally or subject to conditions. However, the Court has to keep in mind that if a condition of the deposit of an amount is imposed while suspending the sentence of fine, the same should not be such that it is impossible for the appellant to comply with it. Such a condition may amount to defeating his right of appeal against the order of Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 11 of 13conviction, which may also violate his rights under Article 21 of the Constitution. 9. In the facts of the case, the total sentence, including substantive sentence and sentence in default of fine, will be imprisonment for eight years and nine months. Considering the huge pendency of criminal appeals triable by a Single Judge and considering the limited period sentence, it is not possible to find fault with the impugned order passed way back on 29th September 2016. 10. Hence, there is no reason to interfere with the impugned order, especially when the respondent has deposited a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­ in this Court. The deposit of Rs.15,00,000/­ shall be treated as a condition for suspending the sentence of fine. Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of with the above modification. The amount of Rs.15,00,000/­ deposited by the respondent has been invested by the Registry in fixed deposit. Immediately after maturity of the existing fixed deposit, the Registry shall transfer the amount of Rs.15,00,000/­ with interest accrued thereon to the Delhi High Court. The High Court shall invest the said amount in an appropriate fixed deposit with any nationalised bank till the disposal of the criminal appeal. Order regarding Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024 Page 12 of 13disbursal/withdrawal of the amount and interest accrued thereon shall be passed at the time of final disposal of the appeal. ……………………..J.

--- JUDGMENT 204 ---
The complaint of the complainants i.e. Complaint Case No.29/1998 regarding medical negligence against Dr. Neeraj Sud and the PGI was dismissed by the State Commission vide judgment and order dated 27.05.2005. Aggrieved by the above decision, the complainants preferred appeal before the NCDRC. After remand in the first round, the matter again came up before the NCDRC wherein the present impugned order has been passed and the complaint has been partly allowed. The judgment and order of the State Commission dismissing the complaint has been set aside holding that Dr. Neeraj Sud and the PGI are jointly and severely liable for payment of compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- and Rs.50,000/- as costs with 6% interest from the date of the complaint for the negligence in treatment. 4. Dr. Neeraj Sud and the PGI together have filed Civil Appeal No.272 of 2012 aggrieved by the finding of NCDRC which states that they had not taken due care in the 2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘PGI’ 2treatment and as such are liable for payment of the compensation and cost as aforesaid. 5. The other appeal i.e. Civil Appeal No.5526 of 2012 has been filed by the complainants. The complainants in the appeal have not claimed any enhancement though upon a reading of the contents, it is implicit that they are not satisfied with the compensation awarded and that the same is inadequate. The main prayer in appeal is only to grant the special leave to petition against the judgment of the NCDRC but with no other prayer. The relief claimed in the appeal by the complainants has been drafted in a very casual and improper manner with no sense of responsibility. We deprecate the manner in which this appeal has been filed, but in the ends of justice, proceed to consider it on merits along with the tagged appeal. 6.

--- JUDGMENT 205 ---
The complainants are father and son. The son was a minor aged about 6 years when he was diagnosed of congenital disorder in his left eye (also known as ‘PTOSIS’ or ‘drooping eyelid’) for which a minor surgery was performed on 26.06.1996 by Dr. Neeraj Sud at PGI. The complainant alleges that there was no other defect in the 3eyes of the son and both eyes had normal 6/9 equal vision and the physical deformity diagnosed (PTOSIS, drooping eyelid) could have been cured by a minor operation which required lifting of the left eyelid a little to make it of the same size as the right eye but the said surgery was done in a most negligent manner. Instead of any improvement the condition of the eye further deteriorated post-surgery. 7. The complainants, thus through the complaint made to the State Commission claimed compensation of Rs.15,00,000/- for the sufferings due to negligence of the doctor and a further sum of Rs.4,55,000/- towards the cost of the treatment, loss of studies etc. In defence, Dr. Neeraj Sud and the PGI admitted that the surgery was performed on 26.06.1996 by Dr. Neeraj Sud who is a qualified post-graduate in ophthalmology. He had three years of experience in eye surgeries including surgery of PTOSIS. During the period 1994-1996 when Dr. Neeraj Sud was a Senior Resident at PGI, he was associated with about 74 PTOSIS operations. The complainant was given proper treatment with due care during operation and that 4the correction and reoccurrence of PTOSIS is a common complication of congenital ptosis which could have been set right by repeat surgery. The patient was not examined by Dr. Neeraj Sud after January, 1997 as he was taken for treatment to Guru Nanak Eye Centre, Delhi and Dr. Daljit Singh Hospital, Amritsar.

--- JUDGMENT 206 ---
8. The complainants have not adduced any evidence to establish any negligence in the performance of surgery or treatment on part of Dr. Neeraj Sud or the PGI. They mainly relied upon the medical records of the PGI which were obtained and considered by the State Commission. 9. The State Commission, upon examination of the records, concluded that the complainants failed to establish any negligence or carelessness on part of the doctor in treating one of the complainants and that the doctor had not adopted any unacceptable medical practice which may have caused damage to the patient. Dr. Neeraj Sud was a duly qualified doctor possessing requisite professional skill and competence to perform the surgery. Therefore, neither Dr. Neeraj Sud nor the PGI can be held responsible for any negligence in the treatment. 510. The aforesaid findings of the State Commission have been partly reversed by the NCDRC only on the basis of the re- examination of the record of the PGI which showed that the patient before operation had proper 6/9 vision in both the eyes and was suffering from a moderate PTOSIS with no history of double vision. However, post-surgery, the condition of PTOSIS deteriorated from moderate to severe and the vision of the patient also fell down from 6/9 in both eyes to 6/18. The patient also suffered from double vision post-surgery. Thus, the NCDRC held that the doctor was apparently negligent in not giving proper treatment and was also careless in not performing the repeat surgery. 11. Deterioration of the condition of the patient post-surgery is not necessarily indicative or suggestive of the fact that the surgery performed or the treatment given to the patient was not proper or inappropriate or that there was some negligence in administering the same. In case of surgery or such treatment it is not necessary that in every case the condition of the patient would improve and the surgery is successful to the satisfaction of the patient. 6It is very much possible that in some rare cases complications of such nature arise but that by itself does not establish any actionable negligence on part of the medical expert. 12. The NCDRC itself acknowledged that Dr. Neeraj Sud had the necessary professional qualification and expertise to treat the patient but it has granted compensation only for the reason that he did not bring the requisite skill and care in the treatment of the patient. 13. The said finding is based on no evidence insofar as the complainants have not adduced any evidence to prove any negligence on part of the doctor rather have relied upon the medical records produced by the PGI. The said records merely demonstrate that post-surgery the condition of the patient had not improved but has deteriorated which as stated earlier may not be indicative of the negligence in the treatment of the patient. 14. It is well recognized that actionable negligence in context of medical profession involves three constituents (i) duty to exercise due care; (ii) breach of duty and (iii) consequential damage. However, a simple lack of care, an 7error of judgment or an accident is not sufficient proof of negligence on part of the medical professional so long as the doctor follows the acceptable practice of the medical profession in discharge of his duties. He cannot be held liable for negligence merely because a better alternative treatment or course of treatment was available or that more skilled doctors were there who could have administered better treatment. 15. A medical professional may be held liable for negligence only when he is not possessed with the requisite qualification or skill or when he fails to exercise reasonable skill which he possesses in giving the treatment. None of the above two essential conditions for establishing negligence stand satisfied in the case at hand as no evidence was brought on record to prove that Dr. Neeraj Sud had not exercised due diligence, care or skill which he possessed in operating the patient and giving treatment to him. 16. When reasonable care, expected of the medical professional, is extended or rendered to the patient unless contrary is proved, it would not be a case for 8actionable negligence. In a celebrated and very often cited decision in Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee (Queen’s Bench Division)3, it was observed that a doctor is not negligent if he is acting in accordance with the acceptable norms of practice unless there is evidence of a medical body of skilled persons in the field opining that the accepted principles/procedure were not followed. The test so laid down popularly came to be known as Bolam’s test and stands approved by the Supreme Court in Jacob Mathews v. State of Punjab and Another4.

--- JUDGMENT 207 ---
If we apply the same in the present case, we would find that Dr. Neeraj Sood was a competent and a skilled doctor possessing requisite qualification to perform PTOSIS surgery and to administer the requisite treatment and that he had followed the accepted mode of practice in performing the surgery and that there was no material to establish any overt act or omission to prove negligence on his part. As stated earlier, no evidence was adduced to prove that he had not exercised sufficient 3 English Law (1957) 1 WLR 582 4 2005(6) SCC 1 9care or has failed to exercise due skill in performing the surgery. 17. In Jacob Mathews (supra) this Court held that a professional may be held liable for negligence if he is not possessed of the requisite skill which he supposes to have or has failed to exercise the same with reasonable competence. The complainant has not adduced any evidence to establish that Dr. Neeraj Sud or the PGI were guilty of not exercising the expertise or the skill possessed by them, so as to hold them liable for negligence. No evidence was produced of any expert body in the medical field to prove that requisite skill possessed by Dr. Neeraj Sood was not exercised by him in discharge of his duties. 18. In other words, simply for the reason that the patient has not responded favourably to the surgery or the treatment administered by a doctor or that the surgery has failed, the doctor cannot be held liable for medical negligence straightway by applying the doctrine of Res Ipsa Loquitor unless it is established by evidence that the doctor failed 10to exercise the due skill possessed by him in discharging of his duties. 19. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the opinion that the NCDRC ought not to have interfered with the findings and the impugned judgment and order of the State Commission so as to hold the doctor of the PGI negligent and to award compensation. 20. Accordingly, the judgment and order dated 24.08.2011 of the NCDRC is hereby set aside and that of the State Commission is restored. Since the complainants have failed to prove any negligence on part of the doctor or the PGI, they are not entitled to any compensation as such, no question arises for its enhancement. 21.

--- JUDGMENT 208 ---
2. The claimant, in a motor vehicle accident having suffered injuries, has filed the present appeal seeking enhancement of compensation. He is aggrieved by the order1 passed by the High Court2. 1 Dated 24.08.2022 in MACA No.256 of 2019 2 High Court of Orissa at Cuttack Page 1 of 143. The facts as available on record are that on 16.01.2014 four persons occupying Verito Vibe Car bearing Registration No.OD-05-D- 9596 were travelling from Sambalpur, Odisha to Cuttack. At about 01:30 pm, the offending Bus bearing Registration No.OD-14-A-1774 being driven at high speed struck against the said car on NH-55 near CPP Chawk, NALCO, Anugul, Odisha, as a result of which the occupants of the car suffered serious injuries. One of the occupants, Ranjan Rout, succumbed to the injuries on 31.05.2017. A police case bearing P.S. Case No.7/2014 was registered against the driver of the offending bus under Sections 279, 337 and 338 of IPC3. Three injured occupants of the car and the legal heirs of the deceased, Ranjan Rout filed different claim petitions, which were assigned to the Court of 2nd Additional District Judge-cum-3rd Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Cuttack. The present appellant had filed petition4 claiming compensation of ₹30,00,000/-. As all the claims had arisen from the same accident the Tribunal clubbed all the claim petitions and decided the same by a common Award5. 3 Indian Penal Code 4 MAC Case No.176 of 2014 5 Dated 15.01.2019 Page 2 of 144. A perusal of the said Award passed by the Tribunal shows that registered owner of the offending bus did not appear despite service, hence, was proceeded against ex parte. The Insurance Company6 contested the claim petitions. The Tribunal framed the following issues: “(i) Whether the claim applications are maintainable? (ii) Whether due to rash and/or negligent driving of the driver of the offending vehicle bearing registration No.OD-14-A-1774 the accident took place and in that accident deceased namely Ranjan Rout succumbed to injuries and other petitioners namely Dipti Ranjan Pattanayak, Santosh Baral, and Chandramani Nanda sustained injuries on their persons? (iii) Whether the petitioners are entitled to get the compensation and if so, what would be the extent?

--- JUDGMENT 209 ---
(iv) Whether both the Opposite Parties or either of them are/is liable to pay the compensation? and (v) To what other relief/s, if any, the respective petitioners are entitled?” 6 National Insurance Company Limited Page 3 of 145. The Issue No.(ii) was decided in favour of the claimants. As far as entitlement of compensation is concerned, the claim of the present appellant was discussed under para ‘13’ of the Award of the Tribunal. The evidence led to the effect that he sustained head injury, which was grievous in nature. The claimant was initially admitted in Angul Government Hospital and due to his serious condition, he was shifted to Ashwini Hospital, Cuttack for better treatment and remained admitted there from 16.01.2014 to 11.02.2014. During that period, he had undergone a major brain surgery. The mother of the appellant in her statement stated that due to the accident, her son (appellant) had become mentally unsound. He is not able to understand anything and is bedridden since then. 5.1 The appellant visited Ashwini Hospital for his follow up after surgery on 17.06.2014, 15.09.2014 and 25.07.2015. It was claimed that the mother of the appellant spent about ₹15,00,000/- on his treatment, which is still going on. However, total bills produced towards medical expenses were to the tune of ₹3,31,153/-. The aforesaid amount was awarded by the Tribunal. The Record Keeper of the Ashwini Hospital was also summoned in evidence who proved the medical record of the appellant, which mentioned that he had sustained grievous head injury fracture of C6 and T4 vertebra. He also produced the medical bills.

--- JUDGMENT 210 ---
Page 4 of 146. As far as the employment of the appellant is concerned, it was claimed that at the relevant point of time he was working as Branch Manager in Padma Infrastructure Private Limited and was earning salary of ₹22,000/- per month. However, the Tribunal referring to Income Tax return of the appellant (Ext.15)7 assessed the income at ₹1,62,420/- per annum for the assessment year 2011-12 and that was made the basis for awarding compensation. His disability was assessed by the District Medical Board, Jagatsinghpur (Ext.13), according to which he was declared to be disabled to the extent of 60%. It is pertinent to note that the aforesaid assessment of disability of the appellant was conducted 02 years after the accident, meaning thereby, the disability was subsisting. It was claimed that on account of 60% disability suffered by the appellant, he had suffered 100% functional disability because of brain injury suffered by him. However, the Tribunal assessed the disability and loss in earning capacity only to the extent of 60%. 7. The age of the appellant was about 32 years at the time of the accident. Since the appellant fell in the age group between 31 to 35, multiplier 16 was applied for assessment of compensation, 7 Inadvertently, recorded as Ext. 16 in the High Court and Tribunal’s order. Page 5 of 14referring to the judgment of this Court in Sarla Verma (Smt.) and others v. Delhi Transport Corporation and another8.

--- JUDGMENT 211 ---
8. While assessing the compensation, the Tribunal, in addition to the loss of future income calculated at 60% disability, awarded ₹50,000/- on account of mental agony, pain and suffering, and loss of amenities, and further awarded ₹1,00,000/- for future medical expenses. The total compensation assessed was as under: Head Amount (in ₹) Loss of future income 15,59,232/- (₹1,62,420 x 16 x 60/100) Past medical expenditure including 3,51,153/- cost of medicine, special diet & the attendant Mental agony, pain, suffering and 50,000/- loss of amenities Future medical expenses 1,00,000/- Total 20,60,385/- along with interest @ 6% per annum 9. Aggrieved against the said award of the Tribunal, the present appellant as well as the Insurance Company preferred appeals9 before the High Court. The High Court opined that the appellant had suffered 100% functional disability as against 60% assessed by the Tribunal because even if the disability from persistent 8 (2009) 6 SCC 121, [2009] 5 SCR 1098, 2009 INSC 506 9 MACA No.256 of 2019 by the appellant and MACA No.350 of 2021 by the Insurance Company Page 6 of 14neurocognitive is 60%, such disability entails 100% loss of earning capacity. The High Court modified the Award of the Tribunal and enhanced the amount of compensation from ₹20,60,385/- to ₹30,99,873/-. Head Compensation (in ₹) Loss of future income 25,98,720/- (₹ 1,62,420 x 16 x 100% disability) Medical Expenditure 3,51,153/- Mental agony and suffering 50,000/- Future medical expenses 1,00,000/- Total 30,99,873/- along with interest @ 6% per annum 10 In the present SLP, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that while assessing the compensation, the Tribunal as well as the High Court have failed to appreciate that the income claimed by appellant was ₹22,000/- per month i.e. ₹2,64,000/- per annum. However, the assessment of compensation was made by taking the income at ₹1,62,420/- per annum, which pertained to assessment year 2011-12 i.e. financial year 2010-11. It is to be noted that the accident had taken place on 16.01.2014, i.e. after 02 years from the said financial year. Page 7 of 1410.1 It was further submitted that the amount of compensation should be enhanced by including factor of future prospect as it has not been considered by the Tribunal and High Court. Further, he should be awarded enhanced compensation under the head of future medical expenses as he would be required to incur medical expenses on a regular basis, and should also be granted compensation for an attendant. 10.2 Learned counsel for appellant also submitted that compensation on account of mental agony, pain and suffering and loss of amenities as assessed by the Tribunal is also on lower side as the appellant will undergo pain and suffering due to injuries and will go through mental agony throughout his life on account of brain injury. 11. On the other hand, learned counsel for the Insurance Company submitted that the assessment of compensation by the High Court is on the higher side. There is no scope of further enhancement specially keeping in view the fact that the appellant had claimed a sum of ₹30,00,000/- as compensation, and the High Court has already awarded more than that. However, still being reasonable, the Insurance Company did not prefer any appeal. Page 8 of 1412. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant materials on record. 13. For the purpose of clarification, the High Court enhanced the compensation to Rs. 30,99,873 from Rs. 20,60,385 as awarded by Tribunal. This was done by considering the functional disability at 100% as opposed to 60%, as assessed by the Tribunal. 14. On the issue of assessment of income, we are of the view that that an enhanced income should be considered for calculation of compensation. In this regard, the appellant has produced on record his income tax returns for the assessment years 2010-11 and 2011-12 as Exhibits 14 and 15, respectively. As per the records, for the assessment year 2010-11 (the financial year will be 2009-10), the income shown by the appellant was to the tune of ₹1,65,100/-. For the assessment year 2011-12 (the financial year will be 2010-11), the income was shown as ₹1,77,400/-. Further, as per the Salary Certificate Exhibit-22 placed on record by the appellant, he was working as Branch Manager for Padma Infrastructure and he was getting a consolidated salary of ₹22,000 one year prior to the date of accident. Now, it is to be noted that the accident took place on 16.01.2014, in the financial year 2013-14. If we calculate the annual income considering ₹22,000, it would come out to ₹2,64,000/- per annum. However, as per Page 9 of 14the High Court and the Tribunal, the annual income is assessed at ₹1,62,420/-. However, both the courts below failed to consider the fact that there is a gap of approximately 02 years and 09 months between the said income tax returns and the date of accident. It can be seen that the income of the appellant, based on the income tax returns so produced on record is progressive, there is a possibility that he may have left his business and join service to improve his income. Thus, in our view, it would be reasonable to take the income of the appellant at ₹2,00,000/- per annum, i.e., ₹16,666.67 per month. 14.1 With respect to the multiplier, we do not find any error in the order passed by the High Court applying the multiplier of 16 considering the age of the appellant as 32 years on the date of the accident. 14.2 On the point of assessment of functional disability as 100% by the High Court as against 60% by the Tribunal, there is no challenge by the insurance company. 14.3 However, the Tribunal and the High Court both have failed to consider the fact that the appellant is also entitled for enhancement on account of future prospects. Hence, in line with the law laid down in National Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay Sethi and Page 10 of 14Others10, given the age of appellant was 32 years at the time of accident, he is entitled to 40% future prospects. 15. As far as award of amount on account of medical expenditure is concerned, we do not find any case to be made out for further enhancement, as the amount awarded is in tune with the bills placed by the appellant on record. 16. Coming to the compensation under the head of attendant, Tribunal awarded a meagre sum of ₹10,000/-. While this amount may have been awarded considering the cost of attendant charges incurred during the period of appellant’s treatment, as he remained admitted in hospital for 25 days and had to undergo surgery post initial operation as well. However, now, considering the fact of mental disability to be suffered by appellant, who is now around 40 years old and the age of the mother who is above 60 years old, and will be appellant’s primary caretaker, we are of the opinion that a reasonable amount for future attendant charges should also be awarded to the appellant. 17. In this regard, we have perused the statement of the appellant’s mother (PW-3). As per her statement, initially they had engaged an attendant at ₹6,000 per month. However, he had left his 10 (2017) 16 SCC 680, [2017] SCR 100, 2017 INSC 1068 Page 11 of 14services about a month before the mother was cross-examined on 23rd September, 2016. Further, the appellant’s father works as a priest and have a meagre monthly income. Thus, it is the appellant’s mother and other family members who are taking care of him. Considering the aforesaid facts, in our opinion, a lump sum amount of ₹1,00,000/- is reasonable and deserves to be awarded to the appellant on account of future attendant charges. 18. In addition to the above, appellant is also entitled to compensation on account of loss of marriage prospects. A perusal of the impugned award of the Tribunal and the High Court shows that nothing has been awarded to the appellant under this head. In our opinion, considering the law laid down by this Court on this issue, the appellant deserves to be awarded a sum of ₹1,00,000/- on this account. 19. Further, in our view, a compensation of ₹50,000/- on account of pain and suffering is also on lower side and the same deserves to be enhanced to ₹1,00,000/-. It is for the reason that on account of the injury suffered, the appellant has become mentally unstable, having disability of 60%, which indeed has resulted in 100% functional disability. Page 12 of 1420. An argument is raised by learned counsel for the insurance company that the appellant has initially claimed a sum of ₹30,00,000/- and since the same having been awarded to him by the High Court, no further enhancement is possible. We cannot accept this argument and it is duly rejected. It is a settled proportion of law, that the amount of compensation claimed is not a bar for the Tribunal and the High Court to award more than what is claimed, provided it is found to be just and reasonable. It is the duty of the Court to assess fair compensation. Rough calculation made by the claimant is not a bar or the upper limit. Reference in this regard can be made to the judgment of this Court in the case of Meena Devi vs. Nunu Chand Mahto11.

--- JUDGMENT 212 ---
2. The widow, minor child and parents of the deceased Ikhbal are the appellants in the present proceedings. Ikhbal died in an accident on 10.06.2013 being knocked down by a car as he was proceeding in his motorcycle from Thodupuzha to Muttom. He died of the injuries sustained in the said accident which allegedly occurred on account of the negligence of the driver of the car. Respondent nos. 1 to 3 are the owner, driver and insurer of the car respectively. Respondent nos. 2 and 3 contested the claim petition while respondent no. 1 remained ex-parte. 3. According to the appellants, while the deceased was travelling on a motorcycle and reached near ‘Mrala’ junction, a K.S.R.T.C. bus, which was going in front, stopped at the bus stop. The deceased attempted to overtake the bus and at that time the subject car driven by respondent no. 2 came from the opposite direction and hit at the motorcycle of the deceased on which he fell down and sustained fatal injuries. He was taken to the hospital, but he succumbed to the injuries. The deceased3 was an employee as U.D. Clerk in Registration Department and had monthly income of Rs. 21,456/-.

--- JUDGMENT 213 ---
Respondent nos. 2 and 3 denied the involvement of the car in the accident. According to them, respondent no. 2 was driving the car carefully and the accident occurred due to the negligence of the deceased because he attempted to overtake the parked K.S.R.T.C. bus. In the process, the motorcycle hit on the bus and the deceased fell down and sustained fatal injuries. The deceased was taken to the hospital by respondent no. 2 who reached the spot soon after the accident. The car of respondent no. 2 did not hit the deceased’s motorcycle. The respondent no. 3 admitted the policy. 5. The appellants examined six witnesses before the MACT while the respondents examined two witnesses. Both the parties exhibited number of documents in their evidence. The MACT assessed the compensation to hold that the appellants are entitled to a total compensation of Rs. 46,31,496/-. However, the claim petition was dismissed on the ground that the appellants have failed to prove that the accident occurred due to negligent driving of respondent no. 2/driver, nor it is proved that4 the car was involved in the accident. The said findings have been affirmed by the High Court. 6. Mr.

--- JUDGMENT 214 ---
Thomas P. Joseph, learned senior counsel for the appellants submits that there is ample evidence demonstrating involvement of the car in the subject accident and the findings to the contrary is utterly perverse. It is argued that the MACT and the High Court as well have recorded the findings adverse to the appellants basing on conjectures and surmises and by complete misreading the evidence. It is vehemently argued that the statement of witnesses have to be read in conjunction with principle of res ipsa loquitur, which the courts below have failed. Learned counsel prayed for allowing the appeal to award the sum assessed by the MACT. 7. Per contra, Mr. Atul Nanda, learned senior counsel for respondent no. 3 would submit that the courts below have correctly held that the subject car owned by respondent no. 1 was not involved in the accident. Referring to the statement of witnesses, learned senior counsel has argued that none of the witnesses have seen the car hitting the motorcycle driven by the deceased. It is lastly argued that both the courts below have5 recorded the findings after careful examination of the evidence which warrants no interference by this Court in exercise of power under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. 8. Before proceeding to dwell on the merits of the matter we remind ourselves that the present is an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India wherein, ordinarily, this Court would not reappreciate the evidence. However, this Court in Mangla Ram v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors.2 has held that in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, ordinarily this Court will not engage itself in reappreciation of the evidence as such but can certainly examine the evidence on record to consider the challenge to the findings recorded by Tribunal or the High Court, being perverse or replete with error apparent on the face of the record and being manifestly wrong. This being the legal position, we proceed to examine the evidence on record to examine the correctness of the finding recorded by the courts below as to whether the subject car was involved in the accident or not. 2 (2018) 5 SCC 6566 9. It was the case of the appellants from the inception that the deceased was hit by the subject car which came driven from the opposite direction as a result of which he was thrown on the road and sustained fatal injuries. The final report (closure report) of FIR No. 342 of 2013 records that the damage occurred to the subject car is due to the skied motorcycle glide to the road and hit to the front bumper and grill of the car, which was coming at that time and the accident occurred for which the drivers of the bus or the car were not responsible. However, it clearly records that there was damage to the car on account of the accident. 10. PW-2 in his deposition stated that the accident was a result of collision between the car and the bike. This witness is the driver of the bus. He was sitting on the driver seat and after hearing the sound of the accident, he looked back and saw the deceased was lying on the road. Nearby people told him that the deceased was hit by the car due to over speeding. In cross- examination he denied that the car driver was not involved in the accident. 11. PW-3 is the Teashop owner at the place of occurrence. He says that he heard the sound of accident, and the mudguard of7 the car was detached. In cross-examination, he states that as the car hit, the wheel of the bike rotated. He denied the suggestion that the bike touched the bus and fell down or that he has not seen the offence. 12. PW-5 was the SHO of Karimkunnam Police Station who has prepared the Mahazar of the car, bus and the bike. In the Mahazar of the car, it was noted that the paint on the right side of the head light is lost, and scratches are seen here and there on the right side of the body. According to him, the grill of the car is dented, and parking light is broken. 13. PW-6 is an important witness who was presented as an eyewitness to the accident. He had seen the motorcycle overtaking the bus and at that time the car hit the motorcycle. The car forwarded a little and stopped and the injured was taken to the hospital in the same car which hit him. This witness has remained firm in the cross-examination. 14. RW-2 is respondent no. 2 as also the driver of the subject car. He says that the bike skied and fell in front of the car. He admits in cross-examination that when the motorcycle skied and8 reached in front of the car, the bus was 100 feet away and he stopped the car on the spot where the bike hit the car. 15. From the above evidence of the witnesses, it is apparent that (I) the car had suffered damages; (II) the car driver admits that the bus was 100 feet away when the motorcycle hit the car; (III) PW-6, an eyewitness, has narrated the accident and (IV) PW-2, the driver of the bus also speaks about hearing the sound of the accident and nearby people telling him that the car had hit the bike. 16. The courts below have recorded the finding of non- involvement of the car in the accident by disbelieving the eyewitness, PW-6 only on the ground that in the police investigation, he was not examined as an eyewitness. In our considered view, a witness who is otherwise found trustworthy cannot be disbelieved, in a motor accident case, only on the ground that the police have not recorded his statement during investigation. There is abundance of evidence pointing to the fact that the car was involved in the accident and the courts below have not considered the evidence in true perspective and have misguided themselves to record perverse finding regarding non-9 involvement of the car in the accident. In claim cases, arising out of motor accident, the court has to apply the principles of preponderance of probability and cannot apply the test of proof beyond reasonable doubt. The evidence available in the present case tested on the principles of preponderance of probability can record only one finding that the car was involved in the accident, otherwise, the damage found to the car in the Mahazar (Annexure P-2) was not possible. The Mahazar clearly records that the front bumper right side of the car is broken, front right parking light is broken, the grill fitted above the front bumper is curved. With such damages to the front side of the body of the car, it is impossible to record a finding that the car was not involved in the accident. 17. In the light of the evidence on record, we set aside the finding of the courts below that the car was not involved in the accident, resultantly, holding that the deceased died as a result of accident involving the car insured with respondent no. 3. We, therefore, set aside the judgment and order of the courts below and allow the claim petition to award compensation to the appellants at Rs. 46,31,496/- with interest @ 9% per annum10 from the date of filing of the claim petition till the realisation of the payment, which shall be made within three months from today, failing which, the award amount shall carry interest @ 12% per annum. 18.

--- JUDGMENT 215 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 816 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NOS. OF 2024 (Arising out of SLP(C)Nos.23939-23940 of 2023) SAROJ & ORS. … APPELLANTS VERSUS IFFCO-TOKIO GENERAL INSURANCE CO. & ORS.…RESPONDENTS O R D E R SANJAY KAROL J., Leave Granted. 2. These appeals are at the instance of the wife and sons1 of the deceased Silak Ram, who was on 4th August, 2015, travelling on a motorcycle bearing 1 Hereinafter “claimant-appellants” 1| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023registration No.HR-12X-2820, along with one Rohit. Both were found lying injured on the side of the road. The former had succumbed to his injuries and the latter was taken for treatment to Medical College, Rohtak. 3. One Krishan who had discovered the deceased and the injured person on the road, reported the matter to the police and, during the investigation of such incident, the statement of the injured Rohit revealed the particulars of the offending vehicles. In connection thereto, F.I.R.No.481/2015 dated 4th August, 2015 under Sections 279/337, 304A was registered at Police Station, Sampla. 4. The claim petition, bearing No.25 of 2015 was instituted by the family members of the deceased on 16th December, 2015 before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Rohtak2. Vide Award dated 26th April, 2017 an amount of Rs.19,35,400/- was passed with an interest @7.5% from the date of filing of the claim petition. The respondent-insurance company was directed to deposit the money into the bank accounts of the claimant-appellants. However, for claimant Nos.2 and 3, who were minors at the relevant time, their share of Rs.6 lakhs each was directed to be placed in fixed deposit till the age of majority or for a period of five years, whichever is later. 5. On appeal to the High Court, vide judgment and order dated 9th March, 2023 passed in FAO Nos.8504 of 2017 (O&M) and 6836 of 2017 (O&M) the amount awarded by the MACT was reduced to Rs.9,22,336/- noting that 2 Hereinafter “MACT” 2| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023minimum wage rates issued by the Government are uniformly applicable throughout the State and, therefore, constitute a better measure for calculating the notional income of a deceased person, as opposed to special DC rates notified by the Deputy Commissioner of a District, and, therefore, would only be applicable to that particular district. Further, it was observed that with respect to the age at the time of death, the Aadhar Card of the deceased records his date of birth to be 1st January 1969; thus, the age comes to 47 years. Hence, the multiplier applicable would be 13.

--- JUDGMENT 216 ---
6. The claimant-appellants, aggrieved by the reduction, have approached this Court. Before us, it was contended that the multiplier applicable would be 14 since, in the School Leave Certificate the date of birth of the deceased is shown as 7th October, 1970. His age, then at the time of the accident was 45 years. They were further aggrieved by the calculation of monthly income to be Rs.5,886/-. 7. Notice was issued on 17th October, 2023. The matter was then sent to Lok Adalat by way of an order dated 23rd July 2024. A subsequent order dated 2nd August 2024 records that the matter could not be settled. 8. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and also perused the record. The questions arising for consideration are - (a) in case of conflict of the dates of birth between the two documents, as in this case between the School Leaving Certificate and the Aadhar Card, which of the two is to be taken as 3| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023authoritative; and (b) whether in the facts of the case, the High Court’s reduction of the compensation awarded by the learned MACT, was justified and in accordance with law? 9. This Court is of the view that the High Court erred in undertaking the reduction as it has. The reasons therefor are recorded in the following paragraphs. 9.1 The general rule insofar as appellate proceedings are concerned is that a Court sitting in appeal is not to substitute its view for that of the Court below. It is only to see that the decision arrived at is not afflicted by perversity, illegality or any other such vice which may compromise it beyond redemption. 9.2 It is also well settled that an order is not to be interfered with simply because another view is possible, which, in the impugned order the High Court seems to have done. 9.3 The question before the High Court was not as to which yardstick to use to determine the notional income of the deceased was ‘better’. Since there is nothing on record to establish that the rates notified by the District Commissioner, Rohtak, would not apply to the deceased, we find no reason to interfere with the finding of the Tribunal. Further, the testimonies of PWs 2, 5 and 6 show that he is an agriculturist who owned his own tractor and a JCB machine. 4| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 20239.4 The second aspect is the age of the deceased. The High Court, relied on the age as mentioned in the Aadhar Card of the deceased, i.e., 1st January, 1969. However, as submitted by the claimant-appellants, the School Leaving Certificate records the date of birth of the deceased to be 7th October, 1970. This will affect the multiplier to be applied. Let us now consider this question. It has to be noted at the outset that a School Leaving Certificate has been accorded statutory recognition. Sub-section (2) of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 20153 reads thus: “(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable grounds for doubt regarding whether the person brought before it is a child or not, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall undertake the process of age determination, by seeking evidence by obtaining — (i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the matriculation or equivalent certificate from the concerned examination Board, if available; and in the absence thereof; (ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat; (iii) and only in the absence of (i) and (ii) above, age shall be determined by an ossification test or any other latest medical age determination test conducted on the orders of the Committee or the Board…” (Emphasis Supplied) 3 Hereafter “JJ Act” 5| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023Whether the Aadhar Card is sufficient proof of a person’s age, has come up for consideration before some High Courts, albeit in the context of different statutes. We shall refer to a few instances but, prior to doing so, it is also important to take note of the purpose behind introduction of the Aadhar Scheme.

--- JUDGMENT 217 ---
In the Constitution Bench judgment in K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India (5-J.)4 Dr. A.K. Sikri, J. wrote as hereinbelow extracted, encapsulating the object and purpose of Aadhar:- “24. Before adverting to the discussion on various issues that have been raised in these petitions, it would be apposite to first understand the structure of the Aadhaar Act and how it operates, having regard to various provisions contained therein. UIDAI was established in the year 2009 by an administrative order i.e. by resolution of the Govt. of India, Planning Commission, vide notification dated January 28, 2009. The object of the establishment of the said Authority was primarily to lay down policies to implement the Unique Identification Scheme (for short the ‘UIS’) of the Government, by which residents of India were to be provided unique identity number. The aim was to serve this as proof of identity, which is unique in nature, as each individual will have only one identity with no chance of duplication. Another objective was that this number could be used for identification of beneficiaries for transfer of benefits, subsidies, services and other purposes. This was the primary reason, viz. to ensure correct identification of targeted beneficiaries for delivery of various subsidies, benefits, services, grants, wages and other social benefits schemes which are funded from the Consolidated Fund of India ... Summing up the Scheme: 62. The whole architecture of Aadhaar is devised to give unique identity to the citizens of this country. No doubt, a person can have various documents on the basis of which that individual can establish her identity. It may be in the form of a passport, Permanent Account Number (PAN) card, ration card and so on. For the purpose of enrolment itself number of documents are prescribed which an individual can produce on the basis of which Aadhaar card can be 4 (2019) 1 SCC 1 6| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023issued. Thus, such documents, in a way, are also proof of identity. However, there is a fundamental difference between the Aadhaar card as a means of identity and other documents through which identity can be established. Enrolment for Aadhaar card also requires giving of demographic information as well as biometric information which is in the form of iris and fingerprints. This process eliminates any chance of duplication. ….. It is for this reason the Aadhaar card is known as Unique Identification (UID). Such an identity is unparalleled.” (Emphasis supplied) 9.5 Turning back to the question of whether Aadhar Card can serve as a proof of age, a perusal of some High Court judgments reveals that this question has been considered on quite a few occasions in the context of the JJ Act. Illustratively, in Manoj Kumar Yadav v. State of M.P.5 a learned Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court held that when it comes to establishing the age, on a plea of juvenility the age mentioned in the Aadhar Card could not be taken as a conclusive proof in view of Section 94 of the JJ Act. Similar observations have been made in Shahrukh Khan v. State of M.P.6 holding that if the genuineness of the School Leaving Certificate is not under challenge, the said document has to be given due primacy. The Punjab & Haryana High Court in the context of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, in Navdeep Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab & Ors.7 held that Aadhar Cards were not “firm proof 5 2023 SCC OnLine MP 1919 6 2023 SCC OnLine MP 2740 7 2021 SCC OnLine P&H 4553 7| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023of age”. Observations similar in nature were also made in Noor Nadia & Anr.

--- JUDGMENT 218 ---
v. State of Punjab & Ors.8, Muskan v. State of Punjab9 as well as several other orders/judgments, in various contexts. Views aligning with the one referred to above have been taken by the High Court of Judicature of Allahabad in Parvati Kumari v. State of U.P.10; the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Kumit Kumar v. State of H.P.11 and the High Court of Kerala in Sofikul Islam v. State of Kerala12. 9.6 We find that the Unique Identification Authority of India13, by way of its Circular No.08 of 2023, has stated, in reference to an Office Memorandum issued by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology dated 20th December 2018, that an Aadhar Card, while can be used to establish identity, it is not per se proof of date of birth. This office memorandum dated 20th December, 2018 was taken note of by a learned Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in State of Maharashtra v. Unique Identification Authority of India And Ors.14 in 8 2021 SCC OnLine P&H 1514 9 2021 SCC OnLine P&H 3649 10 2019 SCC OnLine All 7085 11 2024 SCC OnLine HP 2965 12 2022 SCC OnLine Ker 5814 13 Abbreviated as ‘UIDAI’ 14 Criminal Writ Petition No. 3002 of 2022 8| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023its order dated 28th July, 2023. The Circular is extracted hereinbelow for ready reference:- F.No.HQ-13065/1/2022-AUTH-II HQ/8075 Unique Identification Authority of India (Authentication and Verification Division) UIDAI Headquarter Bangla Sahib Road, Behind Kali Mandir Gole Market, New Delhi-110 001 Dated 22.12.2023 Circular No.08 of 2023 Subject: Accepting Aadhar as a proof of Date of Birth (DoB) – regarding. It has been observed that AUAs/KUAs are considering and accepting Aadhar card / e-Aadhaar as one of the acceptable documents for proof of Date of Birth (DoB). 2. In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that, Aadhaar is a unique 12 digit ID issued to a resident after he/she undergoes the enrolment process by submitting his/her demographic and biometric information. Once a resident is assigned an Aadhaar number, it can be used to authenticate the resident through various modes as prescribed under Aadhaar Act, 2016 and Regulations framed there under. 3. At the time of enrolment/updation, UIDAI records DoB as claimed by the resident, on the basis of the documents submitted by them, as specified under the list of supporting documents for Aadhaar enrolment, provided on the UIDAI website (https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/26 JAN 2023 Aadhar List of documents English.pdf). Further, it is to be noted that Regulations 10(4) and 19A of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and UPDATE) Regulations, 2016, mention that verification of the enrolment and update data shall be performed as provided in Schedule III. 4. In this regard, attention is drawn towards Office Memorandum dated 2-0.12.2018 issued by MeitY through UIDAI, where it has been stated that “An Aadhaar number can be used for establishing identity of an individual subject to authentication and thereby, per se its not a proof of date of birth” (copy enclosed). 5. This aspect of the Aadhar Act, 2016 has been reiterated/highlighted/stressed upon by different High Courts in recent judgments. The most recent one is given by the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay, in the case of State of Maharashtra V/S Unique Identification Authority of India And Ors. dated 28.07.2023 (copy enclosed). 6. In view of the above, it is required that use of Aadhaar, as a proof of DoB needs to be deleted from the list of acceptable documents. 7. This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority. Encl : As above. 9| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023(Sanjeev Yadav) Director Tel: 011-23478609 Email: dirl.auth-hq@uidai.net.in …” (Emphasis supplied) 9.7 Judicial notice has also been taken of the circular above. Recently, a learned Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court in Gopalbhai Naranbhai Vaghela v. Union Of India & Anr.15 in view thereof directed the release of the petitioner's pension in accordance with the date as mentioned in the School Leaving Certificate, keeping aside the difference in the date of birth as mentioned in the Aadhar Card, which was not relevant for the purpose of such consideration. 9.8 In Shabana v. NCT of Delhi16 a learned Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in a case where the petitioner-mother sought a writ of habeas corpus for her daughter, recorded a statement made for and on behalf of UIDAI that “Aadhar Card may not be used as proof of date of birth.” 9.9 Here, we may clarify that we have not expressed any view on the merits of these cases before their respective High Courts, and reference has only been made to them for the limited purpose of examining the suitability of the Aadhar Card as proof of age. 15 Order dated 26th February, 2024 passed in R/ Civil Special Application No.

--- JUDGMENT 219 ---
16484 of 2022 16 2024 SCC OnLine Del 5058. Judgment dated 24th July, 2024. 10| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 202310. That being the position, as it stands with respect to the determination of age, we have no hesitation in accepting the contention of the claimant-appellants, based on the School Leaving Certificate. Thus, we find no error in the learned MACT’s determination of age based on the School Leaving Certificate. 11. On another aspect, i.e., the interest awarded, we find there to be no reason recorded by the High Court in the reduction of the rate of interest from 7.5% to 6%. The High Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that compensation received by way of claims filed before MACT is either born out of injury or death of the claimant or family member of the claimants and so, the amount awarded must do justice to them. It necessarily has to be just and reasonable. In that view of the matter, we find it fit to enhance the rate of interest to 8% to be paid from the date of filing of the claim petition. 12. In view of the above discussion, we direct that the notional income to be taken shall be Rs.9000/- as found by the Tribunal; given that the date of birth is, apropos the above discussion, to be taken as 7th October 1970 and consequently, the multiplier to be applied is 14. 13. Hence, the compensation payable to the claimant-appellants in terms of the principles laid down in National Insurance Co. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 220 ---
Rs.7,357/- p.m. Personal Expenses 11,700-3900 7,357 – 2,452 11250-3,750 (Deduction of 1/3 ) = Rs.7,800/- p.m. = Rs.4,906/- Rs.7,500/-p.m. Rs.93,600/- p.a. = Rs.90,000/- p.a Multiplier 14 13 14 Loss of Rs.93,600 x 14 = Rs.58,872 x 13 Rs.90,000 x 14 = dependency Rs.13,10,400/- = Rs.12,60,000/- Rs.7,65,336/- Loss of Estate Rs.1,00,000/- Rs.15,000/- Rs.18,150/- (10% increase after 3 yrs + 3 yrs) Funeral expenses Rs.25,000/- Rs.15,000/- Rs.18,150/- (10% increase after 3 yrs + 3 yrs) Loss of Consortium Rs.6,00,000/- Rs.40,000 x 3 = Rs.48,400 /- Rs.1,20,000/- (10% increase after 3 yrs + 3 yrs) x 3 = Rs. 1,45,200/- Total compensation Rs.20,35,400/- + Rs.9,22,336/- + Rs.14,41,500/- + 8% 7.5% interest 6% interest interest from date of filing of claim petition 14. The appeals are allowed, the total amount, i.e., Rs.14,41,500, in the interest of just compensation is rounded off to Rs.15,00,000/- with 8% interest from the 12| SLP(C) Nos.23939-40 of 2023date of filing of the claim petition to be released to the rightful claimants in the manner directed by the Tribunal. Pending application(s) if any stands disposed of.

--- JUDGMENT 221 ---
2024 INSC 782 Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 Lalu Yadav …Appellant(s) Versus The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. …Respondent(s) J U D G M E N T C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. Leave granted. 1. The captioned Appeal is directed against the order dated 26.07.2018 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 16825 of 2018. The said Writ Petition was filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking quashment of FIR dated 21.02.2018 bearing Case Crime No. 28 of 2018 registered under Sections 376 and 313 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short the ‘IPC’) at Police Station Nandganj in Ghazipur District of the State of Uttar Page 1 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018Pradesh. In view of the fact that quashment of FIR was sought under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is relevant to refer to a decision of this Court in Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate1. It was held therein that the High Court could exercise its power of judicial review in Criminal matters and it could exercise the power either under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for brevity ‘Cr.P.C’), to prevent the abuse of process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Nomenclature under which a petition is filed is not quite relevant. If the court finds that the petitioner could not invoke the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226, it may treat the petition under Section 482, Cr. P.C.

--- JUDGMENT 222 ---
2. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and also the learned counsel for respondent No. 4 (the complainant). 3. The gravamen of her complaint, based on which the above-mentioned crime was registered on 21.02.2018, is revealed from the following allegations made thereunder: - 1 (1998) 5 SCC 749 Page 2 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018“…My elder sister Meera Devi was married to Satendra Yadav Village Kukuda P.S. Nandganj, District – Ghazipur, Lalu Yadav S/o Seshnath Yadav R/o Atarsuya P.S. Nandganj District – Ghazipur used to come to my house along with the brother in law Ravindra Yadav of my elder sister, at that time about five years back I was a student of High School, then the said Lalu Yadav by way of deceiving myself promise that he will marry me and established physical relationship with me without my consent and started living with me as the husband. He used to say that he would marry me when he gets a job. My mother Rajvati Devi and my father Hari Singh Yadav was also of the knowledge of our relation. When my father and mother raised an objection about our relation then Lalu Yadav told her that he will marry Preeti. He told her that nobody should object and therefore my parents went silent and Lalu Yadav kept established with me the applicant without my consent due to which I became pregnant after the knowledge of which he give me a medicine of with which and abortion has occurred and when the said Lalu Yadav came to the house of the applicant on 28.09.2017 then he took the said applicant to Varanasi on 29.09.2017 and kept me in a hotel and again made physical relationship with me due to which I became pregnant in May 2017 and said Lalu Yadav did my abortion Page 3 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018my pressuring me again, thereafter again 17.12.2017 the said Lalu Yadav took me to a hotel in Varanasi an made physical relationship with me their, thereafter Lalu Yadav got a job in army and after which he is refusing to marry the applicant…” 4. In the contextual situation, it is relevant to refer to the details given under item No.

--- JUDGMENT 223 ---
Earlier, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 counter affidavit was filed fully justifying the impugned order. On behalf of the respondent No. 4 also, a counter affidavit was filed, evidently, on the same line. Pursuant to the order dated 18.08.2023, virtually, permitting continuance of investigation in Crime No. 28/2018 in respect of the allegation of commission of offence under Section 313 IPC, investigation in that regard was continued and completed. Thereupon, an additional affidavit was filed on behalf of the first respondent - State with respect to the status of investigation and the same, insofar as it is relevant, reads thus: - “6. That pursuant to the direction, the investigating officer had conducted investigation with respect to offence under Section 313 IPC and after due investigation and material available on record, including her statement, medical reports etc. has concluded that there is no evidence/material available with respect to offence under Section 313 IPC i.e. no material substantiating abortion of the victim in the present offence and hence as on 02.02.2024 omitted offence under Section 313, IPC. 7. That the investigation under Section 376 is still pending as the same is stayed by this Hon’ble Court.” Page 5 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 20187. In view of the statement in the afore-extracted paragraph 6 and 7, the undisputed position obtained that the allegation of commission of offence under Section 313, IPC stands omitted against the appellant. What survives for consideration is only the question whether the impugned order invites interference and the subject FIR be quashed invoking the inherent jurisdiction? 8. We have already taken note of the facts revealed from the subject FIR itself that the time of occurrence of offence is allegedly, from 05.01.2013 to 05.01.2018 and that it was registered only at 21.34 hrs. on 21.02.2018.

--- JUDGMENT 224 ---
That apart, it is evident that even going by respondent No. 4, the complainant herself and the appellant were living as husband and wife. The complaint of respondent no. 4, as is revealed therefrom, is that the appellant had deceived her by promising to marry and then by establishing physical relationship. At the risk of repetition, we will have to refer to the FIR, carrying the following recitals from her complaint: “… Lalu Yadav S/o Seshnath Yadav R/o Atarsuya P.S. Nandganj District- Ghazipur, used to come to my house along with the brother-in-law Ravindra Yadav of my elder sister, at that time about five years back I was a student of High School, then the said Lalu Yadav by way of deceiving myself promise Page 6 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018that he will marry me and established physical relationship with me without my consent and started living with me as the husband.” (underline supplied) 9. At the very outset, it is to be noted that there is a huge irregularity between the statements “established physical relationship with me without my consent” and “started living with me as the husband”. Be that as it may, bearing in mind the allegations raised by respondent No. 4 reflected in the subject FIR, we will refer to the relevant decisions of this Court. 10. While dismissing the writ petition under the impugned order, presumably taking note of the contentions based on time lag of five years, the High Court relied on its Full Bench decisions in Ajit Singh @ Muraha v. State of U.P.2, and in Satya Pal v. State of U.P.3. as well as the decision of this Court in State of Haryana and Ors. v.

--- JUDGMENT 225 ---
Bhajan Lal and Ors.4. It observed and held that there could be no interference with the investigation or order staying arrest unless cognizable offence is not ex-facie discernible from the allegations contained in the FIR or there exists any statutory 2 2006 (56) ACC 433 3 2000 CrLJ 569 4 AIR 1992 SC 604 Page 7 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018restriction operating against the power of the Police to investigate a case. There can be no two views on the exposition of law thus made relying on the said decisions. In the same breath we will have to say that those decisions can be no bar for the exercise of power under Section 482, CrPC, in various other situations dealt with, in detail, by this Court, including in the decision in Bhajan Lal’s case (supra). 11. To determine whether the case in hand deserves to be quashed at the present stage we will refer to some of the decisions. We have already taken note of the fact that though there was an allegation in the FIR regarding commission of offence under Section 313, IPC, on completion of the investigation, the investigating agency itself omitted the offence under Section 313, IPC against the appellant-accused. In paragraph 102 of the decision in Bhajan Lal’s case (supra) this Court held thus: - “102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following Page 8 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised. (1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused. (4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute Page 9 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.” 12. In the decision in Shivashankar alias Shiva v. State of Karnataka and Anr.5, this Court held thus: - “4. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is difficult to sustain the 5 (2019) 18 SCC 204 Page 10 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018charges levelled against the appellant who may have possibly, made a false promise of marriage to the complainant. It is, however, difficult to hold sexual intercourse in the course of a relationship which has continued for eight years, as “rape” especially in the face of the complainant's own allegation that they lived together as man and wife.” 13. The decision in “XXXX” v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr.6, also assumes relevance in the contextual situation. This court took into consideration an earlier decision of this Court in Naim Ahamed v. State (NCT of Delhi)7, where the allegation was one of alleged rape on false promise of marriage, made five years after the complainant and the accused started having relations and even got pregnant from the accused, of course when she was having a subsisting marriage, the Court found that there cannot be any stretch of imagination that the prosecutrix had given her consent for sexual relationship under misconception. Having considered the said decision and finding identity in facts, this court in the decision reported in (2024) 3 SCC 496 reversed the order impugned therein dismissing the petition filed under Section 482, CrPC for quashment of FIR and 6 (2024) 3 SCC 496 7 2023 SCC OnLine SC 89 Page 11 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018allowed the appeal by setting aside the impugned order and quashing the subject FIR. 14. Now, having bestowed our anxious consideration to the decisions referred supra with reference to the factual situations obtained in the case at hand, we are of the considered view that the High Court has palpably gone wrong in not considering the question whether the allegations in the complaint reveals prima facie case that the complainant had given her consent for the sexual relationship with the appellant under misconception of fact, as alleged, or whether it reveals a case of consensual sex. Firstly, it is to be noted that the subject FIR itself would reveal that there occurred a delay of more than 5 years for registering the FIR; secondly, the very case of the complainant, as revealed from the FIR, would go to show that they lived for a long period as man and wife and thirdly, the facts and circumstances obtained from the subject FIR and other materials on record would reveal absence of a prima facie case that the complainant viz., respondent No. 4 had given her consent for sexual relationship with the appellant under misconception of fact. At any rate, the allegations in the FIR would not constitute a prima facie case of false promise to marry from the inception with a view to Page 12 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018establish sexual relationship and instead they would reveal a prima facie case of long consensual physical relationship, during which the complainant addressed the appellant as her husband. Moreover, it is also the case of the complainant, revealed from the subject FIR and the other materials on record that she went along with the appellant to Varanasi with the knowledge of her family and stayed with him in hotels during such visits. The subsequent refusal to marry the complainant would not be sufficient, in view of the facts and circumstances obtained in the case at hand, by any stretch of imagination to draw existence of a prima facie case that the complainant had given consent for the sexual relationship with the appellant under misconception of fact, so as to accuse the appellant guilty of having committed rape within the meaning of Section 375, IPC. 15. The long and short of the above discussion is that the case at hand is a befitting case where the High Court should have exercised the power available under Section 482, CrPC to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. Now that the allegation of offence under Section 313, IPC is omitted, there is absolutely no prima facie case for proceeding further against the appellant on the allegation of commission of offence punishable Page 13 of 14 SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018under Section 376, IPC. We are of the considered view that the High Court should have exercised its inherent power. 16. For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned order dated 26.07.2018 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 16825 of 2018 is set aside. FIR No. 28/2018 dated 21.02.2018 registered at Police Station – Nandganj, Ghazipur District of Uttar Pradesh and all further proceedings on its basis are quashed. The appeal is accordingly allowed.

--- JUDGMENT 226 ---
NON-REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 822 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2814 of 2023 SAPNA NEGI …PETITIONER(S) VERSUS CHAMAN SINGH AND ANOTHER …RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T Aravind Kumar, J. 1. The Petitioner-wife is seeking for transfer of the proceedings in HMA No.428 of 2023 titled “Sh. Chaman Singh Vs. Smt. Sapna Negi and another” pending before the court of the Principal Judge, Family Courts, Roorkee, Uttarakhand to the Family Court, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi. 2. We have heard the arguments of Shri Gaurav Prakash Pathak appearing for petitioner and Shri Nagarkatti Kartik Uday appearing for respondents. The marriage between the petitioner and respondent came to be solemnised on 12.05.2013 and a daughter, Ms. xxx was born on 18.05.2016. 13. The respondent-husband filed a petition under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for grant of decree of divorce alleging that petitioner had breached the trust and she was already in relationship with the second respondent and despite advice given to her to return to the matrimonial home, she has continued to neglect the family and had failed to discharge her marital obligations. It is also alleged that petitioner-wife having secured a job as a teacher in July, 2022, had completely neglected Respondent-husband. Whereas petitioner-wife contended that on account of the first respondent-husband having neglected the petitioner and her daughter and having failed to take care of them, she was left with no other option but to return to her parental home and she has been residing there from 2019. 4. This Court in order to explore the possibility of the parties arriving at a settlement had referred the matter to the Supreme Court Mediation Centre and report dated 24.07.2024 received from the mediation centre would disclose that mediation had failed. It is pertinent to note at this juncture itself, this Court on 28.08.2024 has recorded that relationship between the petitioner and the first respondent had irretrievably broken down. It is in this background, the matter came to be referred to mediation, which did not fructify into settlement and parties present before the Court have also fairly admitted that the marriage has irretrievably broken down. 25. In the factual scenario explained herein above we are of the considered view that the exercise of the power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India is warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case and also to do complete justice between the parties particularly in the background of this Court having noted herein above that marriage between the petitioner and the first respondent has completely failed and the parties had not cohabitated from 2019 till date and there being no possibility that the parties will cohabitate in future. Hence, continuation of the legal relationship would be unjustified and would not subserve the interest of the parties. Under similar circumstances, this Court in Shilpa Sailesh v. Varun Sreenivasan1, has held that this Court can depart from the procedure as well as the substantive laws, as long as the decision is exercised based on considerations of fundamental, general and specific public policy. It is also held that in exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, this Court has the discretion to dissolve the marriage on the ground of its irretrievable breakdown, and this discretionary power is to be exercised to do ‘complete justice’ to the parties, when this Court is satisfied that the facts established show that the marriage has completely failed and there is no possibility that the parties will cohabit together, and continuation of the formal legal relationship is unjustified. 1 2023 SCC OnLine SC 544 36. Hence, we are of the view that continuation of the proceedings before the Trial Court could only be an ordeal which both the parties will have to undergo and we are of the considered view that marriage between the petitioner and respondent having irretrievably broken down, exercise of power by this Court under Article 142 of Constitution of India is called for in the facts and circumstances obtained and also keeping in mind that petitioner and first respondent are quite young namely 32 years and 38 years respectively and have future ahead of them. It is also undisputed that daughter Ms. xxx born out of this wedlock is aged about 8 years and has been residing with the petitioner-wife from the year 2019. There was a settlement agreement entered into between the parties on 22.03.2023 whereunder it is agreed that the daughter would be residing with the petitioner and will be taken care of by the petitioner herself. Under the said agreement, a sum of Rs 7,00,000/- has been deposited in the name of minor daughter Ms. xxx in a fixed deposit with UCO Bank, Sabhawala Branch by the first respondent- husband which is not disputed by the petitioner, though the said settlement is seriously disputed by the petitioner on the ground that she is not a signatory. Having regard to the fact that petitioner is also gainfully employed in a Government school and earning a reasonable income and keeping in mind the financial capability of the first respondent-husband to take care of the interest of the daughter, we are of the considered view that ends of the justice would meet if the first respondent is directed to pay a permanent 4alimony of Rs.13,00,000/- in addition to the amount of Rs. 7,00,000/- already deposited in a fixed deposit, as it would take care of the financial interest of the minor daughter. Thus, by securing the interest of the minor daughter of the petitioner and first respondent, the petition HMA No.428 of 2023 titled “Sh. Chaman Singh Vs.

--- JUDGMENT 227 ---
2. The sole accused who is the appellant before us was charged for murdering his pregnant daughter and being dissatisfied with the judgement dated 06/08/2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Confirmation Case No.3 of 2017, by which the High Court confirmed the judgement and order of death sentence awarded by the Trial Court for the offences punishable under Section 302, Section 316 (10 years rigorous 1imprisonment and fine of Rs.5,000/-) and Section 364 (life imprisonment) of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the present appeal has been preferred. BRIEF FACTS 3. As per the case of the prosecution, the deceased Pramila was the daughter of appellant/accused and PW1/Smt. Aruna Kumbharkar and she is said to have married Mr. Deepak Kamble in the year 2013 against the wishes of her father and it was an inter-caste marriage. On 28/06/2013 at 5:30 AM, the appellant is said to have left his house and travelled in the auto rickshaw of PW2/Complainant/Pramod Ahire by informing him that his brother Navnath had met with an accident and requested PW2 to go to Kailash Nagar, Nandurnaka. Appellant is said to have informed PW2 on the way that there was no incident of accident of his brother, however, his mother was serious, and her last wish was to see her granddaughter Ms. Pramila. Hence, they proceeded to the house of Pramila and, appellant is said to have informed Pramila’s mother-in-law/Sangita Kamble/PW3 that the health of his mother had deteriorated and she was in serious condition and she was longing to meet Pramila. PW3 is said to have informed the appellant that Pramila was nine months pregnant and that she had an appointment with the Doctor at 11:00 AM. However, the appellant is said to have promised to get Pramila back by 10:00 AM and accordingly appellant and PW2 took her in the autorickshaw to Savkar Hospital. When they reached near the hospital, 2the appellant told the PW2/Complainant that his maternal uncle is working in Savkar Hospital as a watchman and instructed PW2 to secure him. Accordingly, PW2 entered inside the hospital and called him and there was no response and after some time it was intimated by the ward boy of the hospital that watchman whom the PW2 was searching was not working there. Thereafter PW2 returned towards his auto rickshaw and at that point of time he saw, Pramila lying down on the lap of the appellant in the auto rickshaw and her neck was being strangulated by a rope in the hand of the appellant and he found foam was oozing out from her mouth. PW2 rushed towards the autorickshaw and questioned the appellant and was informed that he was not concerned with the consequence as she had spoiled his reputation. PW2 started screaming and people from nearby area came near the autorickshaw but did not lend any helping hand. Thereafter PW2 dragged the appellant out of autorickshaw. PW2 is said to have attempted to save Pramila by dragging the appellant away from her and at that point of time appellant is said to have ran away from the spot. PW2 immediately took her to Savkar Hospital and the doctor informed him to take her to civil hospital as it was a police case. Hence, PW2 immediately took her to civil hospital where the doctor declared Pramila as dead. Subsequently, PW2 lodged a police complaint and on the basis of the same, police registered an FIR in CR No.159/2013. 34. After due investigation, the charge-sheet came to be filed against appellant under Sections 302, 316 and 364 of IPC. The case was committed to the Court of Session. The Trial Court framed charges against the appellant for offences punishable under Section 302, 316 and 364 of IPC and after pleading not guilty, he came to be tried for the aforesaid offences. 5. To prove the charges against the accused, the prosecution examined 10 witnesses. After closure of evidence of the prosecution, further statement of the accused under Section 313 CrPC was recorded. The case of the accused was of a total denial. He deposed that on account of previous monetary transactions between him and PW2, there was a dispute between them and he has been falsely implicated in the case. Appellant did not examine any witness in support of his defence. The Trial Court after appreciation of the facts and evidence on record, convicted the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 of IPC and sentenced him as noted hereinabove. The reference made by the Trial Court was numbered as Confirmation Case No.3/2017 before the High Court. 6. By the impugned judgement and order, the High Court affirmed the reference made by the Trial Court and confirmed the death penalty and sentences awarded by the Trial Court under Sections 302, 316 and 364 IPC. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned judgement and order passed by the High 4Court in confirming the reference made by the Trial Court, the appellant has preferred the present appeal. SUBMISSIONS 7. Learned Senior Counsel, Dr. Aditya Sondhi appearing on behalf of the appellant has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, both the Trial Court and the High Court have erred in convicting the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 IPC. 7.1 It is further submitted that the motive for killing the deceased is not proved. It is submitted that the PW1's statement that appellant was angry with the deceased Pramila as she got married out of caste, is a vague statement and without basis. It is further submitted that appellant did not have any anger towards the deceased and same was evident, as he and deceased used to visit each other's house and the same is confirmed by PW1 and PW3. It is further submitted that deceased was married for over a year and it is unexplained by the prosecution as to why the appellant would wait for a year to commit the offence and that too in a public place. The learned counsel relied on the judgments of this Court in Balaji v State of 5Maharashtra1, Dandu Jaggaraju v State of A.P.2 to contend that motive was not established as the accused knew of the inter caste marriage for long. 7.2 It is further submitted that the eyewitness PW2 is not reliable. It is submitted that PW2 had raised a loan by mortgaging appellant's second-hand motorcycle and that appellant and PW2 had heated exchange regarding the monetary transaction 15 days prior to the incident. 7.3 It is submitted that non examination of the wife of PW2 is fatal to the story of prosecution, as presence of appellant in the house of PW2 and appellant having left PW2’s autorickshaw along with him raises a serious doubt. It is submitted that the appellant’s visit to the deceased house is also not proved. 7.4 It is further submitted that there are material contradictions in the testimonies of PW1 and PW3 regarding the events that occurred on 28/06/2013, which casts a serious doubt on the reliability of these two witnesses. 7.5 It is further submitted that adverse inference has to be drawn against the prosecution for non-examination of material and independent witnesses, Narayan Ramrao i.e. owner of the tea stall located near the scene of incident; 1 (2019) 15 SCC 575 2 (2011) 14 SCC 674 6Prakash Pawar and Jitendra Chaugule i.e. persons residing near Savkar Hospital and Babu Patil (ward boy of Savkar Hospital), despite their statements being recorded by Rajesh Arkhade/investigating officer/PW10. 7.6 It is submitted that even those persons who came to the spot after PW2 shouted for help, are also not examined by the prosecution. The learned counsel relied on the judgments in Jaikam Khan v.

--- JUDGMENT 228 ---
State of UP3, Jagadish v. State of Haryana4, Hem Raj v. State of Haryana5 to contend that non- examination of independent witness by the prosecution is a serious infirmity and is fatal to the case of the prosecution. 7.7 It is submitted that evidence of Dr. Vikrant Savkar/PW5 is not trustworthy and reliable, and there are material contradictions in the testimonies of PW2 and PW5 regarding the events that occurred at the hospital. 7.8 It is further submitted that seizure and sealing of the string which is said to have been used by the accused to strangulate the deceased is not proved and there are discrepancies regarding the length of the same. It is submitted that it is not the case of the prosecution that string is linked and it was not seized from or at the behest of the appellant and it is also not the 3 (2021) 13 SCC 716 4 (2019) 7 SCC 711 5 (2005) 10 SCC 614 7case of prosecution that said string could have caused the ligature mark found around the neck of the deceased. 7.9 It is further submitted that the cause of injury nos.2 to 4 i.e. curvilinear scratches on the deceased's face and nose bridge is not proved by the prosecution. 7.10 It is submitted that multiple investigative errors are committed by the prosecution which casts a serious doubt on the entire prosecution case. 7.11 In the background of aforesaid submissions, learned counsel has prayed for appeal being allowed and appellant being acquitted for the offences for which he was tried. In the alternative, it is prayed to convert the death sentence into life imprisonment, by contending that both Courts have failed to consider the mitigating circumstances in proper perspective. 8. On the contrary, learned counsel appearing for the Respondent, Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari would support the case of the prosecution and contend that both the courts on proper evaluation of evidence have rightly arrived at a conclusion that appellant had committed the offences alleged and both the courts have rightly awarded the death sentence. 8.1 It is submitted that impugned judgement and order of the High Court is well reasoned and has been passed after considering the entire facts and 8circumstances and same is not to be interfered with by this Court in exercise of jurisdiction vested under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. 8.2 It is submitted that the prosecution has been successful in proving the motive of the accused to take revenge and kill his daughter for having married outside the caste as clearly spoken to by the wife of the accused namely PW-1. 8.3 It is further submitted that the prosecution has been successful in establishing and proving that the deceased went with the appellant at his instance and that the appellant was seen strangulating her neck with rope/string and subsequently fleeing from the spot on being confronted by PW2. All these circumstances will singularly point towards the guilt of the accused and does not give scope for raising any doubt. 8.4 It is further submitted that death of deceased Pramila was homicidal death, which has been established and proved by examining the doctors who conducted the post-mortem. 8.5 It is also submitted that this is a fit case to award death sentence and the case would fall into the “rarest of the rare case”. It is further submitted that the balance of mitigating and aggravating circumstances would not lie in favour of the appellant and he has committed a heinous crime by killing his own daughter who was in advanced pregnancy stage in a merciless manner. Therefore, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal and confirm the death sentence awarded by the High Court. 99. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties at length. We have also gone through in detail the judgement and order passed by the Trial Court and High Court. DISCUSSION AND FINDING 10. After considering the rival contentions and on perusal of the evidence tendered by the prosecution in general and in particular the depositions of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 it would clearly emerge that wife of the appellant (PW-1) has spoken in no uncertain terms that her husband was nursing grudge against their daughter namely the deceased Ms. Pramila for having married a person from a lower caste and thereby it had tarnished his image in the society. She has further deposed that appellant used to feel that the community people of his caste had not accepted him, and he was being defamed in the society because of his daughter's inter-caste marriage. She further states, though appellant used to visit the house of Pramila, he had grouse against Pramila for having married out of their caste. She has further deposed that appellant strangulated Pramila with the string of her petticoat which he had carried and same was handed over by her to the police. PW-2, who is the complainant has reiterated his statement made under section 161 CrPC before the police. He has deposed in extenso, the manner, the method, the mode in which appellant had perforced him to proceed towards the house of the brother of the appellant initially and in the mid-way had 10changed his version namely, mother being serious and she intended to see her grand daughter i.e., deceased. He has also deposed that deceased was picked up from her marital home after informing the mother-in-law of the deceased and assuring her to be brought back before 10 AM in order to enable her visit to the Doctor who was attending to Ms. Pramila for pregnancy related tests. PW-2 has also narrated the manner in which he was made to believe the words of the appellant and was coaxed to fetch the watchman of Savkar Hospital. He has clearly deposed by the time he returned he had seen as to how Ms. Pramila was lying on the lap of the appellant who had strangulated her resulting in foam oozing out of her mouth and as a result he had shouted at the appellant which resulted in drawing the attention of the neighbours and help was sought from the public. Appellant is said to have escaped from the scene of occurrence leaving the deceased in the auto and she was rushed to Savkar Hospital initially and later shifted to the civil hospital, where she was pronounced dead. 11. The testimony of PW1 and PW2 fortifies the case of the prosecution the motive of the appellant for commission of the crime. There was no reason for PW1 to depose falsely against her husband and it is also not the case of the appellant that his wife had any enmity towards him and she has falsely deposed against him. The evidence of PW1 is not shaken in the cross 11examination. As such the contention of the appellant that motive for commission of crime is not proved by the appellant is liable to be rejected. 12. It is an established principle of law that conviction can be based on the testimony of a sole eyewitness. This Court in the case of Vadivelu Thevar and another Vs. State of Madras6 has held that the court can act on the testimony of a single witness though uncorroborated. Unless corroboration is insisted upon by a statute, courts should not insist on corroboration except in cases where the nature of the testimony of the single witness itself requires as a rule of prudence that corroboration should be insisted upon. Whether corroboration of the testimony of a single witness is or is not necessary, would depend upon facts and circumstances of each case and depends upon the judicial discretion. In other words, this Court has held that court would be considered with the quality and not the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or not proving a fact. 13. Keeping the aforesaid principles in mind when we turn our attention to the testimony of eyewitness relied upon by the prosecution PW-2, it clearly fortifies the case of the prosecution. We find no reason to doubt the testimony of PW-2 as nothing worthwhile has been elicited in the cross- 6 AIR 1957 SC 614 12examination to discredit his testimony or in other words it can be safely concluded that the testimony of PW-2 has stood the scrutiny. 14. The thrust of the arguments canvassed on behalf of the appellant is to the effect that non-examination of the owner of the tea stall located near the scene of crime; non-examination of the ward boy of Savkar hospital; non-examination of independent witnesses who had assembled near the scene of crime on hue and cry being raised by PW-2; was fatal to the prosecution case. Though at first blush, said arguments looks attractive, on deeper examination it has to be answered against the appellant as it is settled principle of law that non-examination of independent witnesses by itself would not give rise to adverse inference against the prosecution. It would only assume importance when the evidence of eyewitness raises a serious doubt about their presence at the time of actual occurrence.7 15. Yet another plea was raised that due to financial dispute between appellant and PW-2, he (PW-2) had falsely implicated the appellant. During course of examination, it was suggested to PW2 that there was some dispute between him and the appellant on account of monetary transaction. Though PW2 accepted that he had demanded a hand loan from the accused, he has denied that appellant had mortgaged his bike with the friend of PW2 and has 7 Guru Dutt Pathak v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2021) 6 SCC 116 13also denied the receipt of hand loan from the appellant. Section 103 of the Evidence Act, mandates that burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the court to believe its existence. As such, burden was on the appellant to tender evidence for the purpose of proving the alleged financial transaction. Apart from making a bald statement in his statement recorded under Section 313 of CrPC, no efforts have been made by the appellant to either examine the friend of PW2 as a witness or tender any documentary evidence to prove the so called financial transaction. Hence, the plea of the appellant regarding alleged financial transaction with PW2 is not established. 16. The evidence of PW3/Sangita Dashrath Kamble/Mother-in-law of the deceased would also strengthen the case of the prosecution. The testimony of PW3 is to the effect that appellant had visited her house on the date of incident around 7:00 AM to 7:30 AM and informed her that his mother was ill and she intended to see Pramila and as such he intended to take her with him. On being informed by PW3 that Pramila was 9 months pregnant and she needs to be taken to hospital at 11AM, appellant had assured to bring back Pramila at about 10AM. She has deposed that when Pramila did not return at 10:00 AM, she had asked her son Deepak to call his mother-in-law (PW-1) and on enquiry PW1 had questioned them as to why they had sent Pramila with her husband i.e. appellant. She is said to 14have received information to visit Civil Hospital, accordingly, they all went to Civil Hospital and saw the dead body of Pramila. 17. The testimony of PW3 corroborates with the testimony of PW2 on the aspect of the appellant visiting the house of deceased Pramila on the date of incident and taking her with him on the pretext, that his mother i.e. grandmother of Pramila was not keeping well and that she was desirous to see Pramila. 18. After considering the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW3 it is clear that appellant with the motive of killing his daughter had visited her matrimonial home along with PW2 and has taken her in an auto rickshaw on the pretext of visiting his mother and had strangulated her. The appellant is said to have asked PW2 to stop the auto near Savkar hospital and asked him to search for the watchman. By the time PW2 was back, the appellant was strangulating Pramila by means of a rope or string. The chain of events establish the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt and there are no other circumstances to disbelieve the theory of the prosecution. 19. The case of the prosecution is further fortified by the testimony of PW6/Sri. Anand Vilas Pawar who performed the autopsy of Pramila. The testimony of PW6 is that death had occurred due to asphyxia consequent upon ligature strangulation via ligature mark and same is antemortem and 15sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause death. It was further deposed that death of the child in the womb of the mother was caused due to the death of the mother. He has further deposed that Injury No.1 was possible by the string (Article-B) seized by Police and the said string was identified by PW2 and PW6. 20.

--- JUDGMENT 229 ---
The appellant has drawn the attention of this court to some minor discrepancies in the evidence some of the prosecution witnesses. This Court in the case of Rohtash Kumar v State of Haryana8 has held that undue importance should not be given to minor omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which do not go to the heart of the matter and shake the basic version of the prosecution. 21. This Court in the case of Manoj Suryavanshi v State of Chhattisgarh9 has held there are bound to be some discrepancies between the narration of different witnesses, when they speak on details, and unless the contradictions are of a material dimension, the same should not be used to jettison the evidence in its entirety. It is further observed that corroboration of evidence with mathematical niceties cannot be expected in criminal cases. Minor embellishment, there may be, but variations by reason therefore should not render the evidence unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought not 8 (2013) 14 SCC 434 9 (2020) 4 SCC 451 16to obliterate an otherwise acceptable evidence. As such the contention of the appellant raised in this regard is liable to be rejected and accordingly it is rejected.

--- JUDGMENT 230 ---
22. For the reasons aforestated, we are of the opinion that High Court has not committed any error in upholding the conviction of the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 IPC and we are in complete agreement with the view taken by the Trial Court and the High Court in that regard. 23. The next question or incidental question that arises for our consideration is: Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the capital punishment imposed on appellant by the Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court deserves to be maintained or not? 24. This Court in the case of Madan v State of Uttar Pradesh10 has summarised the principles regarding the imposition of death penalty as punishment. It has been held after noticing the Constitution Bench case of Bachan Singh v State of Punjab11, that normal rule is that the offence of murder shall be punished with sentence of life imprisonment and the court can depart from that rule and impose the sentence of death only if there are special reasons for doing so and reasons are required to be recorded in 10 2023 SCC Online SC 1473 11 (1980) 2SCC 684 17writing before imposing the death sentence. It has been further held that the guidelines indicated in Bachan Singh’s case will have to be applied to the facts of each individual case where the question of imposing of death sentence arises and after noticing the propositions emerging from the Bachan Singh’s case, it has been held that if it shocks the collective conscious of the society and fall in the category of ‘rarest of rare cases’, the imposition of death penalty may be warranted. As to whether the facts and circumstances of the case, warrants imposition of death penalty or not cannot be applied in any straight jacket formula and it would be on facts and circumstances unravelled in each case. It depends upon the terrain of facts and circumstances it may have travelled and takes its colour from the same or in other words with mathematical precision it cannot be moulded. 25. Hence, the question which arises for our consideration in the instant case is whether the present case would fall in the category of “rarest of rare case” so as to confirm the death penalty or the sentence can be commuted? 26. This Court vide order dated 25/04/2023 had called for a Prison Conduct Report, Probation Officer's Report of accused, Psychological Evaluation Report of Accused and Mitigation Investigation Report. 27. As per prison conduct report dated 06/07/2023 forwarded by Superintendent, District Jail, Yervada, it is opined that appellant is aged 47 18years and his conduct and behaviour is satisfactory with other inmates and prison staff. Same is the report of the probation officers dated 28/06/2023 and they further state that appellant is not involved in any criminal activity in jail for the past 6 years and his behaviour with jail staff and inmates is satisfactory. 28.

--- JUDGMENT 231 ---
As per the Mitigation Investigation Report forwarded by Ms. Neha Kangralkar dated 25/04/2023 titled ‘Mitigation Investigation Report for Eknath Kisan Kumbharkar’, the following mitigation circumstances are identified. i.Time spent in prison: Appellant has spent about 11 years behind bars. ii.Absence of criminal antecedents iii. Socio-economic background: Appellant comes from a poor nomadic community in Maharashtra. He had an alcoholic father, and was forced to start working since the age of 5 to support his family, doing odd jobs such as cattle rearing and selling milk. After his marriage, he tried different jobs including driving an auto. iv.Adverse childhood experiences: Appellant suffered from parental neglect due to poverty and it was primarily his elder sisters who brought him up. He grew up witnessing his alcoholic father’s physical and verbal abuse, and dropped out of school when he was 10 years old and had to enter the workforce at an early age. v.Efforts to bring family out of poverty: Appellant made constant efforts to bring his family out of poverty, including by borrowing money to buy autos to earn more. However, due to his poverty and debt, he was unable to keep the autos. vi.Mental and emotional disturbance: Appellant was under immense pressure from his community due to the inter-caste marriage of the deceased as well as prior ostracization from their community due to a family 19conflict. Further, the death of his son and subsequent substance dependence and pressures of poverty even prior to the incident may have already put him under mental and emotional disturbance. vii.

--- JUDGMENT 232 ---
During the mitigation interviews, he displayed speech issues, as also confirmed by the state reports. He has experienced social isolation in Yerwada, since prisoners called him yeda (mad) after the stroke. As a possible coping mechanism, he spent his time engaging in conversations with Mata- an imaginary woman. viii.Post conviction mental Illness: Appellant’s permanent cognitive impairment will only worsen with age. His mental health concerns including speaking to ‘Mata’ and having a confused understanding of the death sentence and what it entails. ix.During the early years of incarceration, Appellant engaged in multiple prison activities- learning English, doing art, and making bags.” 29. The psychiatric assessment report dated 19/06/2023 submitted by Sasson General Hospital notes that the appellant has speech issues and significant cognitive impairment due to a stroke that he suffered from while in prison in 2021. The cardiological evaluation report from Sasson hospital records that the appellant had an angioplasty in 2014. He has ischemic heart disease, which requires continued medical management. The neurological evaluation notes that he has right sided hemiparesis due to his stroke in 2021 and left frontoparietal gliosis per CT brain done in 2023. He has persistent speech deficit due to the stroke, which will continue and require continuous medical management throughout his life. 2030.

--- JUDGMENT 233 ---
We have scrutinized the aforesaid reports submitted to this court. We find that the present case would not fall in the category of “rarest of rare cases” wherein it can be held that imposition of death penalty is the only alternative. We are of the considered opinion that the present case would fall in the category of middle path as held by this court in various judgments of this court12. 31. In the instant case, it is to be noted that appellant hails from a poor nomadic community in Maharashtra. He had an alcoholic father and suffered parental neglect and poverty. He dropped out of school when he was 10 years old and was forced to start working to support his family, doing odd jobs. All efforts put by the appellant to bring his family out of poverty did not yield desired results. Neither the appellant nor any of his family members have any criminal antecedent. It cannot be presumed that appellant is a hardened criminal who cannot be reformed. Hence, it cannot be said that there is no possibility of reformation, even though the appellant has committed a gruesome crime. 32. The appellant was aged about 38 years at the time of commission of the crime. He has no criminal antecedents and there are various other 12 Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767; Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharasthra, (2013) 5 SCC 546; Gandi Doddabasappa alias Gandhi Basavaraj v. State of Karnataka, (2017) 5 SCC 415; Prakash Dhawal Khairnar (Patil) v. State of Maharastra, (2002) 2 SCC 35, Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2013) 3 SCC 294; Madan v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 2023 SCC Online SC 1473 21mitigating circumstances existing in his favour as per the reports which we have discussed above. The medical reports of the appellant would disclose that he has speech issues, and he has undergone an angioplasty in 2014, apart from suffering other serious ailments, as already noted herein above. The conduct report from the prison would disclose that the behaviour of the appellant in the jail is satisfactory with everyone for the past six years. Considering these factors, we are of the considered view that even though the crime committed by the appellant is unquestionably grave and unpardonable, it is not appropriate to affirm the death sentence that was awarded to him. The doctrine of “rarest of rare” requires that death sentence should not be imposed only by taking into consideration the grave nature of crime but only if there is no possibility of reformation by a criminal. Being conscious of the fact that sentence of life imprisonment is subject to remission, which would not be appropriate in view of the gruesome crime committed by the appellant, the course of middle path requires to be adopted in the instant case. In that view of the matter, we find that the death penalty needs to be converted to a fixed sentence during which period the appellant would not be entitled to apply for remission. 33.

--- JUDGMENT 234 ---
Leave granted. FACTUAL ASPECT 2. The 4th respondent is a Co-operative Bank. The 1st, 2nd, 5th and 6th respondents had taken a business loan of Rs.25,00,000/- from the 4th respondent. 7th to 9th respondents guaranteed re-payment of the said loan. 3. As the 1st, 2nd, 5th and 6th respondents committed defaults in payment of instalments, the 4th respondent bank filed a dispute before the 3rd respondent for recovery of the loan amount with interest. The 3rd respondent is the Assistant Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 1 of 8Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Recovery Officer. The dispute was allowed. The 4th respondent was held entitled to a sum of Rs.21,92,942/- with further interest and costs from the borrowers. In recovery proceedings, on 10th June 2019, a sale proclamation was issued by the 3rd respondent for the sale of property held by the 1st and 2nd respondents. The value of the property subject matter of auction was fixed at Rs.80,67,500/- . The sale proclamation of the auction sale fixed on 22nd July 2019 was published in the local newspapers on 4th July 2019. In the auction sale, the highest bid of Rs.81,20,000/- offered by the appellant was accepted. A sale confirmation certificate was issued on 5th September 2019 by the 3rd respondent to the appellant. The amount of Rs.81,20,000/- was deposited by the appellant on 21st July 2019 with the 3rd respondent. The excess amount of Rs.59,64,600/- was sought to be refunded to the borrowers by the 3rd respondent by a cheque along with a letter dated 5th September 2019. It appears that the cheque was returned due to inter se dispute amongst the borrowers. 4. The 1st and 2nd respondents invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court of Karnataka for setting aside the auction. By judgment dated 17th March 2022, the learned Single Judge proceeded to set aside the auction sale made in favour of the appellant. The learned Single Judge held that the 4th respondent bank was entitled to the awarded amount along with interest, and the 1st and 2nd respondents are liable to pay the said amount to the bank. The learned Single Judge noted that the amount of Rs.25,61,400/- was deposited by the 1st and Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 2 of 82nd respondents within three months of filing the writ petition. The learned Single Judge allowed the 4th respondent bank to withdraw the said amount together with interest accrued thereon. The learned Single Judge directed the 4th respondent to refund the entire auction amount paid by the appellant along with an additional amount of 5 per cent of the said amount in the light of sub-rule 4(b) of Rule 38 of the Karnataka Co- operative Societies Rules, 1960 (for short, ‘the Rules’). 5. Being aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant preferred Writ Appeal before the Division Bench, which was dismissed by the judgment dated 5th September 2022. 6. The decisions of the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench are the subject matter of challenge in this appeal. 7. Though the direction to set aside the auction sale was challenged in this appeal, as can be seen from the order dated 17th March 2023 passed by this Court, notice was issued only on the issue of adequately compensating the appellant. The said order records that the 4th respondent bank retained the sum of Rs.81,20,000/- paid by the appellant from 21st July 2019. Order dated 4th January 2024 records the statement of the learned counsel appearing for the 4th respondent that the amount deposited by the appellant was received by the said respondent on 13th October 2022. Till that date, it was lying with the 3rd respondent. The order dated 12th January 2024 Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 3 of 8passed by this Court records that the appellant was claiming interest from the 3rd and 4th respondents. SUBMISSIONS 8. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant and the learned counsel for the 4th respondent. Notice has been duly served to the 3rd respondent. 9. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the appellant is that solatium at 5 per cent of the amount deposited by the appellant granted to the appellant is inadequate. He submitted that the appellant was deprived of the use of the sum of Rs.81,20,000/- from 21st July 2019. Therefore, the appellant was deprived of interest on the said amount. He would, thus, submit that the appellant is entitled to receive interest on the said amount from the date of its deposit till the date of refund. 10. The learned counsel appearing for the 4th respondent submitted that as per the said Rules, while setting aside the auction, 5 per cent of the amount deposited by the appellant has been ordered to be paid to the appellant by way of compensation. The learned counsel submitted that in view of the payment of the 5 per cent amount, the appellant had been adequately compensated. He submitted that, in any case, the 4th respondent bank received the amount deposited by the appellant on 13th October 2022, and therefore, liability, if any, to pay interest cannot be fastened on the 4th respondent for the period prior to 13th October 2022. Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No.

--- JUDGMENT 235 ---
5464 of 2023 Page 4 of 8CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 11. We have perused the impugned judgments. The learned Single Judge, in paragraph 7 of the impugned judgment, has noted that within a period of three months from the date of filing of the Writ Petition, the 1st and 2nd respondents deposited the due amount of Rs.25,61,400/- in the Court. The learned Single Judge observed that the award against the 1st and 2nd respondents was in the sum of Rs.21,92,942/- along with interest at the rate of 15 per cent and costs. Accordingly, the 1st and 2nd respondents had deposited a sum of Rs.25,61,400/- in terms of the award. Therefore, the learned Single Judge concluded that the 1st and 2nd respondents were not wilful defaulters. The learned Single Judge placed reliance on sub- rules 4(a) and 4(b) of Rule 38 of the said Rules. Clause (b) of sub-rule 4 of Rule 38 provides that when an owner of a property sold in auction makes an application within 30 days from the date of sale and deposits the arrears specified in the sale proclamation within the said period of 30 days, the Recovery Officer shall pass an order setting aside the sale. While doing so, the Recovery Officer shall refund the purchase money to the auction purchaser together with 5 per cent of the amount deposited by the person applying for setting aside the auction. As the 1st and 2nd respondents did not apply for setting aside the auction within 30 days, clause (b) of sub-rule 4 of Rule 38 had no application. However, the learned Single Judge, while exercising discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, directed that the appellant be Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 5 of 8compensated by paying 5 per cent of the amount deposited by him as the auction purchaser. In law, there was no basis for the said direction. The Division Bench has confirmed the said direction by holding that payment of the additional amount of 5 per cent adequately compensates the appellant. The 4th respondent bank has not challenged the impugned orders and has thus accepted the finding that the appellant must be compensated. 12. In short, the High Court set aside the auction sale not based on the provisions of the said Rules or on the ground that the auction was illegal. The High Court set aside the auction on equitable considerations, as the entire amount due and payable to the 4th respondent bank, including interest, was deposited by the 1st and 2nd respondents with the High Court within three months from filing the Writ Petition. 13. Therefore, there is no doubt that the appellant must be compensated as he was deprived of using the amount of Rs.81,20,000/- from 21st July 2019 till the date of actual refund due to no fault on his part. As stated earlier, the amount was transferred by the 3rd respondent to the 4th respondent on 13th October 2022. 14. In our view, the appellant was entitled to receive interest on the said amount of Rs.81,20,000/- at the rate of 6 per cent per annum from the date of deposit of the said amount till the date of refund. It is an admitted position that the 3rd respondent conducted the auction of the property claimed by Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 6 of 8the 1st and 2nd respondents at the instance of the 4th respondent. Admittedly, the 4th respondent bank has not challenged the impugned orders and has thus accepted the finding that the appellant must be compensated. Therefore, the 4th respondent bank will be liable to pay interest to the appellant. The fact that the amount was lying deposited with the 3rd respondent is irrelevant as the auction was at the instance of the 4th respondent. Though there was nothing illegal about the auction, 4th respondent did not challenge the impugned orders. Therefore, the impugned judgments need modification in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case for adequately compensating the appellant. 15. Accordingly, we pass the following order: a) The impugned judgments dated 5th September 2022 and 17th March 2022 are hereby modified by setting aside direction to pay an amount equivalent to 5 per cent of Rs.81,20,000/- to the appellant; b) We direct the 4th respondent to pay simple interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum on the sum of Rs. 81,20,000/- to the appellant from 21st July 2019 till the date of the actual refund of the amount of Rs. 81,20,000/- to the appellant; and c) The entire interest amount shall be paid by the 4th respondent to the appellant within a period of six weeks from today. Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No. 5464 of 2023 Page 7 of 8d) The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed on above terms. ……………………..J.

--- JUDGMENT 236 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 797 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. / 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7963 / 2023) Horrmal (Deceased) through his LRs and …Appellant(s) others versus State of Haryana and others …Respondent(s) WITH Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 15090-15091 / 2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15089 / 2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9187-9191/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7111-7114/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9185-9186/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15082-15088/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7115-7121/2023) 1 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10896-10905/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15081/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 11052/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9184/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9176-9182/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9183/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4876/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16148/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15095/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15093-15094/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19163/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19127/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16147/2023) 2 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19126/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17847/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 12218-12219/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19996/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20619/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16146/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19130/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19995/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16142-16145/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9714-9715/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15079-15080/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9454/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16149/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 16141/2023) 3 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. …/2024-Diary No.31546/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. …./2024-Diary No(s). 31567/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20560/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. …./2024-Diary No(s). 38885/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. …./2024-Diary No(s). 48155/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. …./2024-Diary No(s). 52730/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21685-21686/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23820-23821/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19128-19129/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 22476-22477/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1066-1067/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1070-1071/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6711/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19125/2023) 4 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1068-1069/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 617-618/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 46-52/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24189-24190/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 608/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24109-24110/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 612-613/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24167-24168/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1712/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21832-21833/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23874-23875/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4936-4942/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5169-5172/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24024-24046/2022) 5 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23835-23864/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23868-23871/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2584-2585/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 615-616/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23659-23662/2022) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4548-4549/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4547/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3130-3131/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1984-1985/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1974-1975/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4944/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1991-1992/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3163-3164/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2578-2579/2023) 6 | PageCivil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3155-3156/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 4546/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1977-1978/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3136-3142/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1710-1711/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5594-5595/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1968-1969/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2586-2587/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1979-1980/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1981-1982/2023) Civil Appeal No. /2024 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 2581/2023) 7 | PageJUDGEMENT SURYA KANT, J. Delay condoned.

--- JUDGMENT 237 ---
2. These appeals are preferred by the expropriated landowners (hereinafter ‘Appellants’), impugning the judgement dated 23.08.2022 passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court at Chandigarh (hereinafter, ‘High Court’), whereby their appeals seeking further enhancement in compensation for their acquired lands, have been dismissed. As a necessary corollary, the High Court has allowed the cross appeals filed by the Respondent State, challenging the enhancement in compensation made by the Reference Court. Consequently, the Awards passed by the Reference Court have been set aside and the compensation as was granted by the Land Acquisition Collector (hereinafter, ‘LAC’) has been restored. A. FACTS 3. The instant dispute regarding the grant of just and fair compensation originated with the issuance of a notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter, ‘1894 8 | PageAct’) on 11.02.2011, for the acquisition of approximately 302.75 acres of land by the Respondent State. This land, including the Appellants’ lands, is situated in the revenue estate of Tauru village in Mewat District. The acquisition process was initiated for the development and utilisation of land for public purposes, specifically for carving out Residential and Utility Areas in Sectors 7, 8 and 11 in Mewat District under the Haryana Urban Development Authority Act, 1977. A notification under Section 6 of the 1894 Act was thereafter issued on 10.02.2012.

--- JUDGMENT 238 ---
4. The LAC passed the award on 22.10.2013 in respect of the land admeasuring 302.75 acres and estimated the compensation at Rupees 45,00,000/- per acre, along with 30% solatium and an additional amount of 12% per annum for the acquired land. Further, compensation for the lands abutting the Mohammadpur—Sohna—Tauru bypass road were enhanced by 20% and 25%, respectively, over the already fixed rate. The LAC assessed the compensation primarily based on the rates fixed by the Divisional Level Rate Fixation Committee in the following manner: (a) 2057 Kanal at Rupees 45,00,000/- per acre; (b) 113 Kanals and 9 Marlas at Rupees 54,00,000/- per acre; and (c) 251 Kanals and 11 Marlas at Rupees 56,25,000/- per acre. In addition 9 | Pageto this, the LAC also affixed compensation for building structures and trees wherever subsisting on the acquired lands. 5. Aggrieved by the award dated 22.10.2013, the Appellants filed Reference(s) under Section 18 of the 1894 Act before the Additional District Judge, Mewat (hereinafter, ‘Reference Court’). The Reference Court, vide separate awards, enhanced the market value of the acquired land to Rupees 92,62,500/- per acre, in addition to granting other statutory benefits. The Reference Court, in this instance, relied upon a sale exemplar, Ex. P76, to assess the market value of the acquired land as on the date of the issuance of Section 4 notification, and subsequently increased the compensation amount. Both the Appellants and the Respondent, being dissatisfied with the decision of the Reference Court, preferred appeals before the High Court. 6. In this vein, the High Court allowed the appeals preferred by the Respondent State while dismissing those filed by the Appellants. The High Court held that the Reference Court had incorrectly estimated the market value and enhanced the compensation as it ignored various sale instances of comparable parcels of land that had been produced by the Respondents. Additionally, the High Court also doubted the reliability of Ex. P76, 10 | Pagewhich was the basis of the Reference Court’s decision, on the ground that this sale deed belonged to a commercial plot of land and was post the notification issued under Section 4 of the 1894 Act. Accordingly, the High Court set aside the award(s) of the Reference Court and reverted the compensation amount to that initially granted by the LAC. Hence, these appeals.

--- JUDGMENT 239 ---
B. CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES 7. We have heard Learned Senior Counsel for the parties at a considerable length and meticulously perused the documents submitted on record. 8. S/Shri Narender Hooda, Sunil Dalal and Gagan Gupta, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants, first demonstrated the potentiality of the acquired land. They contended that the High Court had overlooked the fact that the acquired lands fell squarely within the municipal limits of Tauru city and were surrounded by civic amenities such as a Bus Stand, Hospital, School, College, a Power Station and Industrial as well as Residential establishments. They further asserted that the acquired land was located on the Sohna-Tauru bypass and was in close proximity to the Gurgaon-National Capital Region, as also the Industrial Township established at Bhiwadi, Rajasthan. 11 | PageAdditionally, the land is situated between the Sohna—Rewari metal road on one side and the KMP Highway on the other. This strategic location, they argued, indicated that the market value of the acquired land, having immense potential at the time of acquisition, could not have been valued at less than Rupees 5,00,00,000/- per acre. 9. It was contended that the sale exemplars, particularly Ex. RW1/D and RW1/F, which have been relied upon by the LAC and the High Court while assessing the rate of compensation at Rupees 45,00,000/- per acre, appertained to the smaller pieces of land and were inferior in nature, as the sale consideration mentioned therein was lower than the rate estimated by the LAC itself. Instead, they urged that Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 240 ---
12 | Page10. Given what had been adduced, Learned Senior Counsels relied on a plethora of decisions in support of their arguments, including the judgment of this Court in Dollar Co. v. Collector of Madras,1 wherein it was held that a sale deed of a recent date could be considered the best evidence. Additionally, they placed reliance on the decision in Special Land Acquisition Officer and another v. M.K. Rafiq Saheb,2 where this Court held that sale deeds pertaining to smaller areas could be taken into consideration by applying a cut. 11. Conversely, Mr. Vikramjit Bannerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General of India, representing the Respondents, contended that the sale deeds produced by the Appellants could not be relied upon as they pertained to sale instances of tiny plots of land constituting only a few Marlas. More specifically, he argued that Ex. P3 was not reliable since it measured only 1 Kanal and 10.5 Marlas, making it significantly smaller in comparison to the acquired land. Similarly, with respect to Ex. P76, which was also heavily relied upon by the Appellants, he asserted that it ought to be discarded, not only because it was subsequent to the Section 4 1 AIR 1975 SC 1670. 2 (2011) 7 SCC 714. 13 | Pagenotification but also since the land therein was purchased for a commercial purpose by a private company for warehousing, and thus would not accurately reflect the market value of the acquired land. 12. Instead, Mr. Bannerjee urged that the sale instances placed on record by the Respondents should be relied upon despite having been recorded post the Section 4 notification, as they lend proper guidance for estimating the market value of the acquired land on the crucial date of 11.02.2021. Lastly, he asserted that even if the Court were to consider the sale instance of a smaller parcel of land, only those sale exemplars where the land has been used towards developmental purposes should be relied upon, and after applying the appropriate deduction towards development charges. C.

--- JUDGMENT 241 ---
ANALYSIS 14. As already elucidated in the facts of this case, there has been a significant difference in the evaluations conducted by the Reference Court and, subsequently, the High Court. The High Court has reduced the valuation affixed by the Reference Court by half and, instead, restored the compensation amount granted by the LAC. Given the differences in the approaches adopted by these courts and the variation in outcomes faced by the Appellants, it becomes imperative for us to assess the evidence placed on record by both parties and determine whether sufficient grounds subsist for us to enhance the compensation so awarded. 15. In this regard, it would be appropriate to refer to the table prepared by the High Court, which, in its decision, has aptly summarised the different evidence produced by the parties as follows: 15 | PageSr. Ex. Vasika Dated Sale Area of Rate Village No. No No. Consideratio Land Sold Per acre n (In Rs.) (K.M.S) Sale Deeds Produced by the respective parties in the Award dated: 06.01.2017,01.03.2017, 19.07.2017, 20.07.2017, 03.10.2017, 01.08.2017 Sale Deeds Produced by the Landowners 1. P2 1539 2.2.2010 1,75,000 50 Sq.

--- JUDGMENT 242 ---
Yds. 1,69,40,000 Tauru 2. P3 960 27.8.2010 32,27,000 922 Sq. Yds. 1,69,40,000 Tauru 3. P4 387 31.5.2010 3,36,000 96 Sq. Yds. 1,69,40,000 Tauru 4. P5 1725 17.12.2010 2,81,000 75 Sq. Yds. 1,81,33,867 Tauru 5. P6 1707 9.3.2010 2,62,500 75 Sq. Yds 1,69,40,000 Tauru 6. P7 2076 24.1.2011 5,25,000 150 Sq. Yds. 1,69,40,000 Tauru 7. P8 2187 7.2.2011 3,50,000 100 Sq. Yds. 1,69,40,000 Tauru 8. P9 4633 18.1.2012 7,50,000 140 Sq. Yds. 2,59,28,571 Tauru 9. P10 2186 7.2.2011 2,10,000 30 Sq. Yds. 16,94,000 Tauru 10 P76 1220 4.7.2011 10,18,87,500 66k (1320 M) 1,23,50,000 Tauru Sale Deeds Produced by the State 11 RW 2481 29.8.2011 3,25,000 12.5 M 41,60,000 Tauru 1/C 12 RW1 1220 21.06.2012 60,00,000 1 Acre 4 K 40,00,000 Tauru /D (240 M) 13 RW1 1802 6.8.2012 17,25,000 3K-9M 40,00,000 Tauru /E (69M) 14 RW1 3798 25.11.2011 60,00,000 1 Acre 4k 40,00,000 Tauru /F (240 M) 15 RW 1779 3.8.2012 18,25,000 3K-13M 40,00,000 Tauru 1/G (73 M) 16 RW 4339 13.03.2013 8,32,500 225 Sq. Yds. 1,79,08,000 Tauru 1/H 17 R8 1724 17.12.10 2,00,000 10 M 32,00,000 Gvarka 16 | Page18 R9 1591 01.12.10 4,80,000 17 M 45,17,648 Gvarka 19 R10 1304 20.10.2010 10,23,750 4K-11M 18,00,000 Gvarka (91M) 20 R11 1396 3.11.2010 1,05,000 5M 33,60,000 Gvarka 21 R12 2116 31.1.2011 2,31,000 330 Sq. 33,88,000 Gvarka Yds. 22 R13 1851 29.12.2010 1,05,000 5M 33,60,000 Gvarka 23. R14 2124 1.2.2011 53,000 2.5M 33,92,000 Gvarka 24. R15 2243 14.2.2011 1,63,350 9M 29,04,000 Gvarka 25 R16 1404 8.11.2010 75000 6M 20,00,000 Gvarka 26 R18 2211 9.2.2011 36,300 2M 29,04,000 Gvarka 16. Upon further examination of the details of this table, it seems to us that these exemplars can be classified in the following manner: (a) sale instances executed prior to the issuance of Section 4 notification; and (b) sales instances executed after the issuance of the Section 4 notification. Thereupon, we have taken the liberty of further representing this recalibrated categorisation in a tabular form as follows: Pre-Section 4 Post Section-4 notification notification Appellants P2-P8, P10 P9 and P76 Respondents R8-14, R16, R18 R15, RW1/C-H 17 | Page17. Having distinguished between the two sets of sale instances executed before and after the issuance of the Section 4 notification, we would now proceed to determine whether the Appellants are entitled to compensation at a rate higher than the one determined by the High Court. 18. The process of assessing or affixing compensation is not tethered to precision but is rather aimed at a nuanced estimation of pertinent factors. This task is governed by Section 23(1) of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894, which mandates that, in determining compensation for acquired land, the Court must consider the ‘market value’ of the land as of the ‘date of publication of the notification under Section 4’. The ‘market value’ is to be assessed with reference to factors such as standing crops and trees, the severance of part of the land, damage to movable or immovable property or earnings, the need to relocate one’s residence or business, and any loss of profits from the land between the publication of the declaration under Section 6 and the Collector's assumption of possession. 19.

--- JUDGMENT 243 ---
This Court has through various judicial precedents, including a three-judge bench decision in Special Land 18 | PageAcquisition Officer v. T. Adinarayan Setty,3 held that the ‘market value’ connotes the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller, taking into account the land’s current conditions and its advantages and potentialities. For this, typically, the best approach is the comparable sales method, under which the bona fide sale exemplars of similar lands are relied upon to ascertain the market value of the land under acquisition. However, to ensure that the valuation is just and proper, this Court has explained that such sale exemplars must satisfy certain criteria, including that: (a) the sale must be a genuine transaction; (b) the sale deed must have been executed around the time of the Section 4 notification; (c) the land must be situated near the acquired land; (d) the nature of the land covered in the sale instance must be similar to the acquired land; and (e) the size of the plot covered by the sale instance should be comparable to the land acquired.4 20. Apart from satisfying these factors, it is also imperative that the sale exemplars reflect the price of the land on the ‘date of publication of the notification under Section 4’. On account of this express condition, there are numerous instances where this Court 3 AIR 1959 SC 429.

--- JUDGMENT 244 ---
4 Shaji Kuriakose v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., (2001) 7 SCC 650. 19 | Pagehas laid down that the sale exemplars executed after the Section 4 notification should not ordinarily be relied upon.5 This is grounded in the reasoning that once the acquisition process begins, it can impact the valuation of the land, rendering subsequent sale exemplars to be potentially inaccurate reflections of the true valuation of the acquired land. This principle was cogently addressed by this Court in A. Natesam Pillai v. Tahsildar,6 which held that the commencement of acquisition often leads to an increase in the market values of adjacent lands, thereby discrediting post-notification transactions as reliable indicators of the acquired land’s value. 21. Having been equipped with the factors to be considered while selecting a comparable sale instance to draw an estimate from, it is perhaps suitable to tackle the core issue and ascertain which of the sale exemplars produced before us may be most appropriate to be utilised in this exercise. 22. In the case at hand, the High Court and the Reference Court have disagreed on what sale exemplars could be used to determine fair compensation. While the Reference Court relied on Ex P76, the 5 General Manager, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v. Rameshbhai Jivanbhai Patel, 2008 (14) SCC 745; Maya Devi v. State of Haryana, (2018) 2 SCC 474. 6 (2010) 9 SCC 118. 20 | PageHigh Court has rejected the same because it was executed after the issuance of the Section 4 notification. Nevertheless, the High Court has fallen prey to the same error and has relied upon the Respondents’ sale exemplars, which were also executed after the acquisition had already begun. 23. As discussed above, post-notification sales can only be considered when better evidence is not available on record and when the party relying on it can convincingly demonstrate that there has been no upward trend in market prices due to the acquisition.7 Consequently, in light of this analysis, the sale deeds numbered P9, P76, R15 and RW1/C-H, which were executed after the date of the issuance of the Section 4 notification, will invariably have to be excluded from any further consideration, save and except for exceptional and compelling circumstances. 24. Apart from these sale deeds that were not proximate temporally, we also deem it appropriate to exclude the sale deeds that are not comparable geographically. It is now a firmly entrenched principle of law that, in the ordinary course, sale exemplars of lands located in the surrounding villages should 7 Karan Singh v. Union of India, (1997) 8 SCC 186l; Rishi Pal Singh v. Meerut Development Authority, (2006) 3 SCC 205. 21 | Pagegenerally not be relied upon, as land valuation may vary significantly by locality. In the landmark decision of Kanwar Singh v. Union of India,8 this Court held that sale exemplars of lands situated in an adjacent village cannot be used to determine the market value of the acquired land since such lands may differ in terms of quality and other attributes. On this ground, the sale deeds enumerated Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 245 ---
P10. In this context, the Respondents have sought to argue that considering the total area of the land in these sale deeds being very small in size, they are also liable to be discarded. True it is, that such sale deeds ought not to directly form the basis for determining the rate at which compensation is to be awarded. Indeed, a thorough review of relevant precedents in this backdrop does reveal that smaller parcels of land conventionally command higher prices. Relying on 8 (1998) 8 SCC 136. 22 | Pagesuch sale exemplars also, especially when only single solitary such instances are presented, may thus not be appropriate.9 26. However, there is no bar in law against considering sale exemplars of smaller plots, provided they are subjected to adequate developmental charges. The rationale behind applying such cuts lies in the fact that smaller plots often command higher prices due to their developed nature, whereas a larger tract of land which is acquired for development may require significant allocation for creating roads, parks, essential services, etc.10 Accordingly, these sale exemplars can be relied upon only after applying appropriate cuts. This Court in Chimanlal Hargovinddas v. LAO,11 authoritatively ruled that when valuing a large block of land, appropriate deduction must be made for setting aside areas for roads, open spaces and dividing the land into smaller plots suitable for the construction of buildings. 27. In the instant case, there are multiple sale deeds of smaller plots, and these represent the best available evidence for estimating compensation. Since there is no legal impediment to considering such sale deeds, the logical progression in the 9 Administrator General of West Bengal v. Collector, Varanasi, (1988) 2 SCC 150. 10 Ibid; Atma Singh v. State of Haryana and others, (2008) 2 SCC 568.

--- JUDGMENT 246 ---
11 (1988) 3 SCC 751. 23 | Pagecompensation estimation process would be to identify the most suitable sale deed(s) for determining the market value and subsequently, to apply adequate deductions on the same. The solution to this state of flux may thus be found in the case of Mehrawal Khewaji Trust v. State of Punjab,12 where this Court laid down as follows: “....It is clear that when there are several exemplars with reference to similar lands, it is the general rule that the highest of the exemplars, if it is satisfied that it is a bona fide transaction, has to be considered and accepted. When the land is being compulsorily taken away from a person, he is entitled to the highest value which similar land in the locality is shown to have fetched in a bona fide transaction entered into between a willing purchaser and a willing seller near about the time of the acquisition.” [Emphasis supplied] 28. This view has been reiterated in Sh. Himmat Singh v. State of M.P.,13 where a three-judge bench of this Court consolidated various precedents to affirm that in circumstances where there are multiple sale deeds available for consideration, the Court shall rely on the highest valued exemplars unless the prices fall within a 12 (2012) 5 SCC 432. 13 (2013) 16 SCC 392. 24 | Pagenarrow range, in which case calculating an average of the values therein may be more congruous. 29. In these extenuating circumstances, there exists significant disparity among the sale exemplars presently under consideration. Amongst these sale exemplars, being Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 247 ---
P2-P8 and Ex. P10, the highest sale instance values the land at Rupees 1,81,33,867 per acre, whereas the lowest values it at Rupees 16,94,000 per acre. Given this wide range and in light of the judicial precedents cited above, we are of the opinion that we should rely upon the highest sale exemplar, which is Ex. P5, rather than solely depending upon an average of the multiple sale deeds produced before us. Despite the Respondents’ vehement contention that Ex. P5 should not be relied upon owing to it being a significantly smaller parcel of land— the detailed analysis conducted above indicates no reason why Ex. P5 cannot be utilised to determine the amount of compensation to be awarded to the Appellants for the acquired land. 30. Thus, having established the sale exemplar being relied upon and consequentially the base price to be Rupees 1,81,33,867 per acre, we now proceed to the aspect of deductions to be applied to the amount so determined. In this regard, there is no hard and fast rule on the amount of deduction to be applied towards 25 | Pagedevelopment charges. Instead, such deductions may, for the purpose of making a small area of land comparable to larger tracts, range from a minimum of 20% to a maximum of 75%.14 31. Since the degree of application of cuts is essentially a question of fact dependent on the unique circumstances of each case, the particulars to be reckoned with in determining the extent of such deduction often include a myriad of factors, such as the relative difference in the size of the land in the sale exemplar vis a vis the acquired land, proximity to a road, nearness to developed areas, etc.15 Additionally, several decisions have also taken into account the nature of the lands because of the stark difference that may exist between the valuation of an agricultural or undeveloped land and the sale price of a small developed plot in a private layout.16 32. Circling back to the facts of the present case, it is evident that the land in Ex. P5 is similar in nature to the acquired land, both being agricultural land. Its proximity to the acquired land and the fact that it is situated in the same village of Tauru, are relevant 14 Balwan Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 2022 SCC Online SC 637; Chandrashekar v.

--- JUDGMENT 248 ---
On the face of these distinctive factors lies the challenge of ascertaining the appropriate extent of deduction to be made. As already established, judicial precedents dictate that the amount of deduction to be applied towards developmental charges can range from anywhere between 20% to 75%. On the one hand, we must acknowledge and recognise the stark disparity between the size of the land covered by the sale exemplar and the acquired land. On the other hand, it is incumbent that we take note of the various 27 | Pageadvantageous factors associated with the acquired land at the time of issuance of the Section 4 notification. A balanced approach in adjudicating this particular issue is therefore necessary. Considering these militating aspects, we cannot justify applying deduction at either extreme end of the spectrum. A prudent course of action might be to steer a middle path, aiming for a range approximately between 46% to 50%. 34. Having said that, even if we were to apply the higher end of deductions from this middle course, at 50%, the compensation to be granted to the Appellants would still surpass the amount initially determined by the LAC and would in fact, be closer in range to the rate granted by the Reference Court. 35. Alternatively, and only to bolster our above arrived conclusion, even if the principle of averaging were applied, the most suitable sale instances for this purpose, as discussed earlier, would be Ex. P2 to Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 249 ---
P8 and Ex. P10, which are noted to be in close proximity to the acquired land. Upon evaluation, the average price of these lands is Rupees 1,49,71,733 per acre, which exceeds the sale consideration shown in most comparable sale examples. This leaves no room for doubt that the compensation awarded by the Reference Court, at the rate of Rupees 92,62,500 per acre, was 28 | Pageneither excessive nor beyond the fair and just value of the acquired land. 36. However, considering the totality of the circumstances and recognizing that the subject land has not been acquired for profiteering or commercial purposes, but primarily for the development of a residential area, we find it appropriate to rely on the valuation reflected in the best exemplar, Ex. P/5, as a fair and reasonable basis for compensation. 37. Thus, upon careful consideration, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court erred in reducing the valuation of the land and affirming the figures granted by the LAC. As demonstrated by our analysis above, the evaluation conducted by the Reference Court was nearly accurate and aligned with the evidence of the sale deeds and potentiality, despite the fact that the sale exemplar Ex. P76, on which it relied upon, may not have been ideal, given the circumstances and its commercial nature.

--- JUDGMENT 250 ---
2. The present appeals challenge the final orders dated 4th July 2023 passed by the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack in CRLMC No. 34 of 2022 and in CRLMC No. 33 of 2022, vide which 1the petition filed by the present appellants for quashing of criminal proceedings came to be disposed of by permitting the appellants to urge all the pleas raised in the said petition before the trial Court at the appropriate stage. The appellants had approached the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“CrPC” for short) praying for quashing of the criminal proceedings in T.R. No. 28 of 2002 pending in the Court of Special Judge (CBI) Bhubaneswar (“trial Court” for short). 3. Shorn of details, the case of the prosecution is as given below. 3.1 On 14th October 2000, on the basis of information received from a reliable source, the Inspector of Police CBI/SPE Bhubaneswar registered a regular case under Section 154 of CrPC being Crime No. RCBHU 2000A0021 (“FIR” for short) against five persons namely, Ajay Kumar Behera (Accused No. 1), Surjit Sen (Accused No. 2), Kaushik Nath Ojha (Accused No.3), Tarini Sen (Accused No. 4), Shaileshree Sen (Accused No. 5) alleging commission of 2offences punishable under Sections 120-B, 420, 468 and 471 of Indian Penal Code 1860 (“IPC” for short) & Sections 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 (“PC Act” for short). The present appellants are Accused No.

--- JUDGMENT 251 ---
3.2 It was alleged in the F.I.R. that Ajay Kumar Behera while being posted as the Branch Manager in Allahabad Bank, Temple Marg Branch, Bhubaneswar (“the Bank” for short) during the year 1998-1999 entered into a criminal conspiracy with the other accused persons. At that time, Surjit Sen and Kaushik Nath Ojha were the Directors of M/s Indo Global Projects Ltd., Bhubaneswar (“IGPL” for short) and the appellants herein were Partners in M/s Clarion Travels, Bhubaneswar (“Clarion Travels” for short). 3.3 It was also alleged in the F.I.R. that on 20th November 1998, a loan application was submitted on behalf of Clarion Travels for the purpose of securing funds to purchase new cars. The loan application was signed by the present appellants on behalf of Clarion Travels. Against the said 3loan application, on 17th December 1998, Ajay Kumar Behera sanctioned a loan of Rs. 8,40,000/- without keeping any security or post-dated cheques. No repayment was ever made, and Ajay Kumar Behera did not pursue the same. 3.4 It was also alleged in the F.I.R. that earlier in time, on 22nd August 1998, a similar loan application was submitted on behalf of IGPL for the same purpose of securing funds to purchase new cars at a cost of Rs. 11,84,600/-. Against the said loan application, on 24th August 1998, Ajay Kumar Behera sanctioned the loan for the said amount. The money was received by Accused No. 3 and 4, who were Directors of IGPL. In furtherance of the loan application, the Accused No. 3 and 4 had also deposited 36 post-dated cheques, which when they were sent for clearing, at a later stage, by the successor of Ajay Kumar Behera bounced. 3.5 It was also alleged in the F.I.R. that, the office address disclosed by both IGPL and Clarion Travels was one and the same, i.e., 168/169-A, Bapuji Nagar, Bhubaneswar. In case of IGPL, it was also alleged that the firm Indo Global Motor 4from where the cars were purportedly purchased by IGPL is in fact shown as a unit of IGPL and that both of them share one and the same address being 56-A, Mancheswar Industrial Estate, Bhubaneswar. Similarly, in the case of Clarion Travels, it was also alleged that the firm M/s Kalinga Auto Centre Ltd. from where the cars were purportedly purchased by Clarion Travels also has the same address 56-A, Mancheswar Industrial Estate, Bhubaneswar. 3.6 In such facts, the matter was taken up for investigation by the Central Bureau of Investigation (“CBI” for short) and the case was registered as T.R. No. 28 of 2002 in the Court of Special Judge (CBI), Bhubneswar. 3.7 On 27th August 2002, the CBI filed the charge-sheet in the trial Court against all the accused persons, including the present appellants, for offences punishable under Sections 120B, 420, 468, 471 of IPC and Sections 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of PC Act. 3.8 Vide order dated 2nd September 2002, the trial Court took 5cognizance and issued summons to the accused persons. 3.9 The Bank also filed two Original Applications being O.A. No. 53 and 57 of 2004 before the Debt Recovery Tribunal, Cuttack (“DRT” for short) for recovery of dues in respect of the loans advanced to IGPL and Clarion Travels. In the proceedings before the DRT, IGPL and Clarion Travels reached a One-Time-Settlement (“OTS” for short) with the Bank, which was accepted, and the loan account was declared as being closed vide letter dated 31st January 2011. In view of the OTS, the recovery proceedings pending before the DRT were disposed of as a full and final payment of the dues of the Bank vide orders dated 3rd May 2011. 3.10 Having settled the matter thus, the present appellants filed separate applications under Section 482 of CrPC before the High Court of Orissa seeking quashing of all the proceedings pending before the trial Court in the case registered as T.R. No. 28 of 2002. The High Court, vide the orders impugned in the present appeals disposed of the applications under Section 482 of CrPC by permitting the 6appellants herein to urge all the pleas raised in their application before the trial Court at the appropriate stage. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal arises. 4. We have heard Shri Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants and Shri Vikramjeet Banerjee learned Additional Solicitor General (“ASG” for short) appearing for the common respondent No.1-Union of India and Mr. Brijesh Kumar Tamber, learned counsel for common respondent No.2. 5. Shri Naidu submits that the appellants before this Court had no active role to play. It is submitted that the Appellant in Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 1415 of 2024 (Accused No.4) and the Appellant in Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 1416 of 2024 (Accused No.5) are women. Accused No. 4 is the wife of Surojit Sen, who was Accused No.2. Accused No. 5 is the wife of the brother of the Accused No. 2. Both the appellants had no active role to play and have been roped in as they are related to the Accused No.2. 6. Shri Naidu further submits that in the proceedings before 7the DRT, the firm run by the appellants reached to an amicable settlement with the Bank, which was accepted, and the entire debt was discharged on 31st January 2011. An amount of Rs.7,50,000/- was deposited with the Bank as a full and final settlement of the Bank’s dues. 7. It is further submitted that OA before the DRT was disposed of on 3rd May 2011 in light of the settlement and, therefore, the continuance of the proceedings against the appellants would be an exercise in futility. 8. Shri Naidu in support of his submissions relied on the following judgments of this Court in the cases of: (i) Central Bureau of Investigation, SPE, SIU (X), New Delhi v. Duncans Agro Industries Ltd., Calcutta1; (ii) Nikhil Merchant v. Central Bureau of Investigation and another2; (iii) Gian Singh v. State of Punjab and another3; (iv) Central Bureau of Investigation, ACB, Mumbai v. 1 (1996) 5 SCC 591 2 (2008) 9 SCC 677 3 (2012) 10 SCC 303 8Narendra Lal Jain and others4; (v) Narinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another5; (vi) Gold Quest International Private Limited v. State of Tamil Nadu and others6; and (vii) Central Bureau of Investigation v. Sadhu Ram Singla and others7. 9.

--- JUDGMENT 252 ---
The facts in the present case are not in dispute. It is not disputed that the matter has been compromised between the borrowers and the Bank. It has also not been in dispute that, upon payment of the amount under the OTS, the loan account of the borrower has been closed. 12. Therefore, the only question would be, as to whether the continuation of the criminal proceedings against the present appellants would be justified or not. 13. At the outset, we may state that we are only considering the cases of two women i.e. Accused Nos. 4 and 5, wherein Accused No.4 is the wife of Accused No.2. It is also not in dispute that the original Accused Nos. 2 and 3 have since died. 14. By a separate judgment of the even date in Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.4353 of 2018 wherein similar facts arose for consideration, we have held that when the matter has been compromised between the borrower and Bank, the continuation of the criminal proceedings would not be justifiable. 1015. Relying on the earlier judgments of this Court, we have held that in the matters arising out of commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or family disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court should exercise its powers under Section 482 CrPC for giving an end to the criminal proceedings. We have held that the possibility of conviction in such cases is remote and bleak and as such, the continuation of the criminal proceedings would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice.

--- JUDGMENT 253 ---
T. Archana, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. Vipin Kumar Jai, learned counsel for the respondent were heard at length. 2. The plaintiff-respondent, Tamil Nadu Khadi and Village Industries Board, instituted a suit for declaration of its title over the suit property measuring about 3750 square feet comprising in Survey No. 16/1 situated in Kotlambakkam 1Panchayat, District Cuddalore and for recovery of its possession. The said suit was filed on the basis of a registered gift deed dated 05.03.1983 allegedly executed by the defendant-appellant which was said to have been accepted by the plaintiff-respondent. 3. The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court vide Judgment and order dated 23.08.1994 primarily on the ground that the alleged gift deed was not valid as it was never accepted and acted upon. Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the plaintiff- respondent preferred an appeal before the District Judge which was allowed vide Judgment and order dated 05.08.1997. The appellate Court reversed the judgment and order of the court of first instance and decreed the suit. The second appeal filed by the defendant-appellant was dismissed on 11.01.2011 by the High Court. In decreeing the suit, the gift was held to be valid with a finding that it was acted upon and accepted and as such in the absence of any clause in the gift deed authorizing revocation, it could not have been revoked as alleged vide revocation deed dated 17.08.1987. 24. The delay of 207 days in filing the Special Leave Petition was condoned and the leave to appeal was granted vide order dated 05.08.2013. Thus, the civil appeal has come up for consideration before us.

--- JUDGMENT 254 ---
5. The moot question which arises for our consideration in this appeal is whether the registered gift deed dated 05.03.1983 was duly acted upon and accepted and is a valid document which continue to exist despite its revocation on 17.08.1987 as the donor had not reserved the right to revoke the same. 6. The registered gift deed dated 05.03.1983 is Exhibit A-1. It has been executed by the defendant-appellant. A perusal of the gift deed reveals that the donor has gifted the suit property in favour of the plaintiff-respondent for the purposes of manufacturing of Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarn etc., with the condition that the plaintiff-respondent shall not transfer the suit property for its own self-interest. The gift deed stipulates that neither the donor nor his legal heirs have any right or interest or will continue to have any right or interest in the suit property from the time and date of the gift deed. The gift deed further states that the gift is with full 3consent of the donor and that from the date of the gift itself, the plaintiff-respondent accepts the suit property for the use as aforesaid. 7. A simple and complete reading of the aforesaid gift deed would reveal that the gift is absolute with no right reserved for its revocation in any contingency. The only purpose stipulated therein is that the property gifted shall be used for manufacturing Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarn etc. 8. It is worth noting that the gift deed itself states that from the date of the gift deed the suit property is accepted by the plaintiff-respondent for the purpose of manufacturing Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarn etc., which duly proves that the gift was accepted. It was also acted upon as pursuant thereof the plaintiff-respondent had applied for mutation to the revenue authorities. In addition to the above, the plaintiff-respondent issued a memo on 16.09.1983, Exhibit A-4 which also proves that the possession of the suit property was taken over and that it proceeded to raise construction thereon. 9. Exhibits A-2 to A-4 prove that the possession of the suit property was taken over by the plaintiff-respondent on the 4date of the gift itself which is sufficient evidence that the gift was acted upon and accepted by the plaintiff-respondent. The plaintiff-respondent, pursuant to the aforesaid gift deed and its acceptance has even applied to the revenue authorities for the mutation of its name which further fortifies the fact that the gift was duly accepted. 10. Considering the above, in view of the findings recorded by the first appellate Court and the High Court that the gift deed was duly acted upon and accepted by the plaintiff- respondent, the conclusion is that the said gift deed cannot be held to be invalid for want of acceptance. Thus, on the basis of the aforesaid gift deed, the plaintiff-respondent acquired absolute right and title over the suit property. 11. Now the question arises as to whether the aforesaid gift deed has been validly revoked vide revocation deed dated 17.08.1987, and if so, what would be its impact upon the rights of the plaintiff-respondent in respect of the suit property. 12. No doubt, the gift validly made can be suspended or revoked under certain contingencies but ordinarily it cannot be 5revoked, more particularly when no such right is reserved under the gift deed. In this connection, a reference may be made to the provisions of Section 126 of the Transfer of Property Act, 18821 which provides that a gift cannot be revoked except for certain contingencies enumerated therein. 13. It is important to reproduce Section 126 of the Act, which reads as follows: “126. When gift may be suspended or revoked.- The donor and donee may agree that on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor a gift shall be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the mere will of the donor, is void wholly or in part, as the case may be. A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases (save want or failure of consideration) in which, if it were a contract, it might be rescinded. Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be revoked. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees for consideration without notice.” 1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 614. Section 126 of the Act is drafted in a peculiar way in the sense that it contains the exceptions to the substantive law first and then the substantive law. The substantive law as is carved out from the simple reading of the aforesaid provision is that a gift cannot be revoked except in the cases mentioned earlier. The said exceptions are three in number; the first part provides that the donor and donee may agree for the suspension or revocation of the gift deed on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor. Secondly, a gift which is revocable wholly or in part with the agreement of the parties, at the mere will of the donor is void wholly or in part as the case may be. Thirdly, a gift may be revoked if it were in the nature of a contract which could be rescinded. 15. In simpler words, ordinarily a gift deed cannot be revoked except for the three contingencies mentioned above. The first is where the donor and the donee agree for its revocation on the happening of any specified event. In the gift deed, there is no such indication that the donor and donee have agreed for the revocation of the gift deed for any reason much less 7on the happening of any specified event. Therefore, the first exception permitting revocation of the gift deed is not attracted in the case at hand. Secondly, a gift deed would be void wholly or in part, if the parties agree that it shall be revocable wholly or in part at the mere will of the donor. In the present case, there is no agreement between the parties for the revocation of the gift deed wholly or in part or at the mere will of the donor. Therefore, the aforesaid condition permitting revocation or holding such a gift deed to be void does not apply. Thirdly, a gift is liable to be revoked in a case where it is in the nature of a contract which could be rescinded. The gift under consideration is not in the form of a contract and the contract, if any, is not liable to be rescinded. Thus, none of the exceptions permitting revocation of the gift deed stands attracted in the present case. Thus, leading to the only conclusion that the gift deed, which was validly made, could not have been revoked in any manner. Accordingly, revocation deed dated 17.08.1987 is void ab initio and is of no consequence which has to be ignored. 816. The non-utilisation of the suit property for manufacturing Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarns etc., the purpose set out in the gift deed, and keeping the same as vacant may be a disobedience of the object of the gift but that by itself would not attract the power to revoke the gift deed. There is no stipulation in the gift deed that if the suit property is not so utilised, the gift would stand revoked or would be revoked at the discretion of the donor. 17. In the end, we come to another limb of the argument that the suit as filed by the plaintiff-respondent is hit by limitation and as such the first appellate court and the High Court manifestly erred in decreeing the same. 18. In context with the point of limitation, the court of first instance has formulated issue no. 4 which reads as under: “Whether the suit is barred by limitation?” 19. Admittedly, the present suit for declaration and recovery of possession of the suit property was filed by the plaintiff- respondent on 25.09.1991. The court of first instance held that as the same was not filed within three years from the 9date of revocation of the gift deed, i.e., 17.08.1987 (Exhibit B-2), the suit is barred by limitation. 20. Once it is held that the gift deed was validly executed resulting in the absolute transfer of title in favour of the plaintiff-respondent, the same is not liable to be revoked, and as such the revocation deed is meaningless especially for the purposes of calculating the period of limitation for instituting the suit. 21. The limitation for a suit for declaration is provided under Part III of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963. It is governed by Articles 56-58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Under all the aforesaid three Articles, the limitation for a suit for declaration is three years. The limitation provided under Articles 56 and 57 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act is in respect to declaration regarding forgery of an instrument issued or registered and validity of the adoption deed. Article 58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act prescribes the limitation for decree of declaration of any other kind and therefore, the suit for declaration of title would essentially fall under Article 58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act and the 10limitation would be three years from the date when the right to sue first accrues. 22. In the case at hand, the suit is not simply for the declaration of title rather it is for a further relief for recovery of possession. It is to be noted that when in a suit for declaration of title, a further relief is claimed in addition to mere declaration, the relief of declaration would only be an ancillary one and for the purposes of limitation, it would be governed by the relief that has been additionally claimed. The further relief claimed in the suit is for recovery of possession based upon title and as such its limitation would be 12 years in terms of Article 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. 23.

--- JUDGMENT 255 ---
Mohammad Yunus vs. Syed Unnissa And Ors2 it has been laid down that in a suit for declaration with a further relief, the limitation would be governed by the Article governing the suit for such further relief. In fact, a suit for a declaration of title to immovable property would not be barred so long as the right to such a property continues and 2 AIR 1961 SC 808 11subsists. When such right continues to subsist, the relief for declaration would be a continuing right and there would be no limitation for such a suit. The principle is that the suit for a declaration for a right cannot be held to be barred so long as Right to Property subsist. 24. Even otherwise, though the limitation for filing a suit for declaration of title is three years as per Article 58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act but for recovery of possession based upon title, the limitation is 12 years from the date the possession of the defendant becomes adverse in terms of Article 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Therefore, suit for the relief of possession was not actually barred and as such the court of first instance could not have dismissed the entire suit as barred by time. 25. No other point was raised and argued before us. 26. Thus, in the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, we do not find any error or illegality on part of the first appellate court and the High Court in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-respondent. 1227. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed as devoid of merit. 28. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. .........…………………………..

--- JUDGMENT 256 ---
4. These tasks were to be completed on or before 11 April 2017. Thereafter, disputes arose between the parties. The appellant invoked the arbitration agreement. The arbitral proceedings commenced and the three-member arbitral tribunal made an award on 7 March 2024 directing the respondent to: a. Pay the appellant a sum of Rs 21,07,66,621 towards the claims that were allowed in its favour; b. Pay the appellant interest on the amount awarded at the rate of nine per cent per annum from 15 November 2017 until the date of the award if the payment was made within three months, and, if not, at the rate of twelve per cent per annum from the date of the award till the date of payment; and c. Pay the appellant Rs 3,20,86,405 by way of costs. Page 2 of 115. Both parties filed applications under Section 33 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 19961 for correction of the award and for additional arbitral awards. The arbitral tribunal dismissed the application filed by the respondent. It allowed the application filed by the appellant only to the extent of increasing the costs awarded to it by Rs 12,00,000 to reflect the fees paid to the arbitral tribunal subsequent to the parties filing their memo of costs. 6. The respondent challenged the arbitral award under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act and moved an application for stay of execution. The High Court, by its impugned judgment and order dated 9 September 2024, granted a stay on the execution of the award conditional on the respondent furnishing a bank guarantee in the sum of Rs 21,07,66,621 within a period of eight weeks. 7. The judgment of the High Court has been assailed by the original claimant of the arbitral proceeding (i.e., the appellant in this case) whose contention is that since the award operates as a money decree under Section 36 of the Arbitration Act, the High Court was not justified in directing merely the furnishing of a bank guarantee in relation to the principal amount. The appellant contends that the respondent ought to have instead been directed to deposit the amount awarded to it as a condition for the grant of a stay on the execution of the award. 8. Mr Shyam Divan, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, has urged that: (i) A body of precedent has emerged from this Court in terms of which the sanctity of arbitration must be preserved by requiring the deposit of the amount 1 “Arbitration Act” Page 3 of 11awarded as a condition for the stay on the enforcement of the award; (ii) The amended provisions of the Arbitration Act require that while considering an application for stay of an award for the payment of money, due regard has to be had to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure 19082; and (iii) The award of Rs 21,07,66,621 covered ten claims of which three were awarded in full and seven in part. The High Court while ordering a stay, has essentially furnished only two reasons.

--- JUDGMENT 257 ---
The first reason pertains to the question of cess, while the only other reason is that the respondent is not “a fly by operator”. 9. Mr C A Sundaram, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, submits that: (i) The amended provisions of the statute incorporate provisions of the CPC in regard to ordering a stay of an award which contains provisions for the payment of money; (ii) Under Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC, the requirement is for furnishing of security and the deposit of money should not, therefore, be regarded as a default option; (iii) The High Court had due regard to the fact that the respondent is a statutory body and correctly held that security should be furnished in the form of a bank guarantee; (iv) As such the impugned judgment should not be interfered with under Article 136 of the Constitution; and (v) The body of precedents which Mr Divan relied on pertains to appeals under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act. 10. Section 36(2) of the Arbitration Act indicates that where an application to set aside an arbitral award has been filed under Section 34, the filing of such an application shall not, by itself, render that award unenforceable, unless the Court grants a stay 2 “CPC” Page 4 of 11on the enforcement of the arbitral award in terms of sub-section (3). The provision indicates that a separate application must be made for this purpose. Sub-section (3) of Section 36 stipulates that where such an application has been filed, the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of the award for reasons to be recorded in writing. Following the amendments brought about by the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2015, the first proviso to sub-section (3) stipulates that the Court shall, while considering an application for grant of stay in the case of an arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the provisions related to the grant of stay of a money decree under the CPC. The second proviso provides for a situation in which the Court may grant unconditional stay. Section 36(3) and its provisos are reproduced below: “36. Enforcement – … (3) Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the operation of the arbitral award, the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such award for reasons to be recorded in writing: Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of stay in the case of an arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the provisions for grant of stay of a money decree under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie case is made out that, – Page 5 of 11(a) the arbitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or (b) the making of the award, was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of the challenge under section 34 to the award. Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply to all court cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or court proceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016).” (emphasis supplied) 11. In the present case, there is an arbitral award to the tune of approximately Rs 21 crores in favour of the appellant. The High Court, while issuing a direction for furnishing of a bank guarantee, dealt with only one of the claims which was awarded by the arbitral tribunal, namely, that which pertained to the refund of the cess under the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act 1996.3 In this regard, the High Court observed that the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner, by its order dated 6 November 2019, held that the Cess Act was not applicable to the appellant which was therefore not required to pay cess under that statute. It noted that the arbitral tribunal had, however, rendered an award in which it directed the respondent to pay the appellant this amount, which had already been paid by the respondent to the appellant. It held that while the substance of the claims of the parties could only be determined in the proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, it was prima facie satisfied that the arbitral 3 “Cess Act” Page 6 of 11tribunal had erred in not considering the claim of the respondent. Apart from discussing this claim, which was in the amount of approximately Rs 3 crores, the High Court did not address the other claims of the appellant which were allowed by the arbitral tribunal. The amount awarded in relation to the remaining claims is approximately Rs 18 crore. 12. The High Court granted a stay on the operation of the award subject to the respondent furnishing a bank guarantee for the principal amount awarded to the appellant, i.e. Rs 21,07,66,621. It held that it was not inclined to issue orders in relation to the interest and the costs awarded to the appellant because “the petitioner is not a fly-by operator and is a statutory undertaking.” The law qua arbitration proceedings, in our view, cannot be any different merely because of the status of the respondent as a statutory undertaking. 13.

--- JUDGMENT 258 ---
In this regard, it is necessary to advert to a decision of a two-Judge Bench of this Court in Pam Developments Private Limited v State of West Bengal4 where it was observed: “20. In our view, in the present context, the phrase used is “having regard to” the provisions of CPC and not “in accordance with” the provisions of CPC. In the latter case, it would have been mandatory, but in the form as mentioned in Rule 36(3) of the Arbitration Act, it would only be directory or as a guiding factor. Mere reference to CPC in the said Section 36 cannot be construed in such a manner that it takes away the power conferred in the main statute (i.e. the Arbitration Act) itself. It is to be taken as a general guideline, which will not make the main provision of the Arbitration Act inapplicable. The 4(2019) 8 SCC 112 Page 7 of 11provisions of CPC are to be followed as a guidance, whereas the provisions of the Arbitration Act are essentially to be first applied. Since, the Arbitration Act is a self-contained Act, the provisions of CPC will apply only insofar as the same are not inconsistent with the spirit and provisions of the Arbitration Act.” 14. The Court also observed: “26. Arbitration proceedings are essentially alternate dispute redressal system meant for early/quick resolution of disputes and in case a money decree — award as passed by the arbitrator against the Government is allowed to be automatically stayed, the very purpose of quick resolution of dispute through arbitration would be defeated as the decree-holder would be fully deprived of the fruits of the award on mere filing of objection under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. The Arbitration Act is a special Act which provides for quick resolution of disputes between the parties and Section 18 of the Act makes it clear that the parties shall be treated with equality. Once the Act mandates so, there cannot be any special treatment given to the Government as a party. As such, under the scheme of the Arbitration Act, no distinction is made nor any differential treatment is to be given to the Government, while considering an application for grant of stay of a money decree in proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. As we have already mentioned above, the reference to CPC in Section 36 of the Arbitration Act is only to guide the court as to what conditions can be imposed, and the same have to be consistent with the provisions of the Arbitration Act. … 28. Section 36 of the Arbitration Act also does not provide for any special treatment to the Government while dealing with grant of stay in an application under proceedings of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. Keeping the aforesaid in consideration and also the provisions of Section 18 providing for equal treatment of parties, it would, in our view, make it clear that there is no exceptional treatment to be given to the Government while considering the application for Page 8 of 11stay under Section 36 filed by the Government in proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.” (emphasis supplied) 15. Bearing in mind the above principles, we are of the view that the High Court was in error in not even prima facie considering the fact that apart from the issue of cess, there was an arbitral award in favour of the appellant in regard to other claims as well. Further, the High Court ought not to have based its decision on the condition for the grant of stay on the status of the respondent as a statutory authority. The Arbitration Act is a self-contained code – it does not distinguish between governmental and private entities. Hence, the decision of the Court cannot be influenced by the position of the party before it and whether it is a fly-by-night operator. Moreover, an assessment as to whether a party is reliable or trustworthy is subjective. Many private entities, too, may rely on the size of their undertaking, its success, public image, or other factors to argue that they are not fly-by-night operators. In the absence of any provision of law in this regard, it would be inappropriate for courts to apply this standard while adjudicating the conditions upon which a stay of an award may be granted. Similarly, the form of security required to be furnished should not depend on whether a party is a statutory or other governmental body or a private entity. Governmental entities must be treated in a similar fashion to private parties insofar as proceedings under the Arbitration Act are concerned, except where otherwise indicated by law. This is because the parties have entered into commercial transactions with full awareness of the implications of compliance and non-compliance with the concerned contracts and Page 9 of 11the consequences which will visit them in law. Hence, the argument that the High Court was correct in directing the respondent to furnish bank guarantees in relation to the amount awarded because it is a statutory body is rejected. 16.

--- JUDGMENT 259 ---
In Toyo Engineering Corpn. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.,5 this Court reiterated the same principle in the following terms: “3. This Court repeatedly having held that Order XLI Rule 5 principles are to be followed in these cases, we find that largely because public corporations are involved, discretion continues to be exercised not on principles under Order XLI Rule 5 but only because large amounts exist and that Government Corporations have to pay these amounts under Arbitral Awards. Both these considerations are irrelevant, as has been pointed out by us earlier.” 17. Under Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC, the Court has the power to direct full or part deposit and/or the furnishing of security in respect of the decretal amount. Bearing in mind the principles which must guide the Court, we are of the view that the order of the High Court requires modification. In modification of the direction of the High Court in the impugned judgment dated 9 September 2024, we direct that: (i) The respondent shall deposit an amount quantified at 75% of the decretal amount, inclusive of interest, on or before 30 November 2024 before the High Court; and (ii) Conditional on the deposit of the aforesaid amount within the period stipulated above, there shall be a stay on the enforcement of the arbitral award. 5 2021 SCC OnLine SC 3455 Page 10 of 1118.

--- JUDGMENT 260 ---
12. The brief controversy presented for adjudication in these appeals is whether the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction, was entitled to entertain a dispute which was purely civil in nature filed for claiming monetary relief/damages arising from fallout of contractual obligations. 3. Brief facts relevant and essential for disposal of these appeals are that the appellant-Municipal Committee, Katra issued a Notice Inviting Tender(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NIT’) dated 3rd March, 2010 inviting bids for supply of mules and mazdoors essentially involved in transportation of pilgrims from the base camp at Katra to holy shrine of Mata Vaishno Devi, atop the Trikuta hill. Several bids were received in response to the said NIT. The respondent herein was the second highest bidder, who subsequently became the highest bidder, as Shri Pritam Das, the original highest bidder did not come forward to execute the contract. Accordingly, the contract came to be offered to the respondent who accepted the offer so given. The tenure of the contract as per NIT was from 1st April, 2010 till 31st March, 2011. In terms of Clause-8 of the NIT, the successful bidder was required to deposit 40% of the bid amount within 24 hours from the time of acceptance, i.e. on or before 31st March, 2010. It was also enjoined 2upon the bidder to deposit 5 post dated cheques along with bank guarantee to secure the amount for remaining tenure of the contract period. 4. Clause-8 of NIT would be germane to the controversy and is being reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - “8. The successful highest bidder, shall have to deposit 40% of the offered amount at the time of provisional acceptance of the offer by the committee immediately but not later than 24 hours from the time of acceptance. Balance contract amount shall have to be deposited in 5 (five) equal installments commencing from 1st May to September 2010, in shape of post dated cheques along with bank guarantee to be deposited within 24 hours from the time of acceptance of offer to secure timely realization the consideration amount. In case of default to deposit 40% of bid offered amount within 24 hours and also fails to fulfill other formalities required as per terms and conditions, the security deposit/earnest money shall be forfeited." 5. The respondent sought relaxation in the Clause-8 of the NIT on the ground that the condition of furnishing bank guarantee for the remainder amount was unjust and arbitrary. 6. Having failed to get a favourable response from the Municipal authorities, the respondent filed a civil suit seeking a declaration that Clause-8 of the NIT was arbitrary. The suit was accompanied by an application seeking temporary injunction. The Court of learned District Judge, Reasi vide order dated 29th April, 2010, allowed the application and granted temporary injunction 3directing the appellants herein to issue the order of allotment of contract to the respondent-plaintiff. 7. The defendants i.e. appellants herein challenged the order dated 29th April, 2010 by filing a Civil 1st Miscellaneous Appeal(CIMA) No.312 of 2010 wherein the High Court passed an order dated 7th May, 2010 directing the appellants to issue a work order in favour of the respondent. 8. In view of the order dated 7th May, 2010 passed by the High Court in the above appeal, a formal work order dated 10th May, 2010 was issued by the appellants to the respondent who commenced the work and collected the revenue for the period commencing from 10th May, 2010 till 7th April, 2011(time of one week extended under orders of the High Court). After conclusion of the contract period, the respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court being OWP No. 743 of 2013 contending that his contract was supposed to commence from 1st April, 2010 and was to run for a period of 365 days till 31st March, 2011. However, the said period was truncated because the same could be commenced from 10th May, 2010 only and hence, the respondent suffered a loss of collection of earnings for a period of 33 days. He, therefore, claimed pro-rata amount of Rs. 71,06,276/- being the purported 4loss suffered on account of the curtailment of the contract period by 33 days. The learned Single Bench of the High Court, vide order dated 3rd July, 2013, disposed of the writ petition, OWP No.743 of 2013 with a direction to the appellants herein to consider the claim of the respondent within six weeks from the date of the order. 9. The claim of the respondent was laid before the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Katra who rejected the same vide order dated 12th August, 2013 which was subjected to challenge in OWP No. 1199 of 2013. 10. The learned Single Bench, took up the OWP No.1199 of 2013 and decided the same vide order dated 20th February, 2015. The findings recorded by the learned Single Judge in paragraph Nos. 14 to 16 of the order are relevant for adjudication of the issue at hand and hence, are being reproduced hereinbelow: - “14. Indisputable position, thus, emerging is that, whereas the petitioner had complied with clause-8 of the auction notice to the extent of offering 40% of the auction amount by way of a cheque, he, however, had failed to comply with rest of the conditions by not issuing five post dated cheques and bank guarantee to secure the payment of rest of the auction amount and instead questioned the legality of clause-8 by filing suit in the court of learned District Judge, Reasi. It was for this failure on the part of the petitioner that allotment letter enabling him to start performing under the contract from 01.04.2010 was not issued by respondent No.3, which, nonetheless, later came to be issued on 10.05.2010 pursuant to and in compliance with order dated 07.05.2010(supra) passed by this Court. As the contract period had to come to an end with the end of the financial year, that is, on 31.03.2011, the petitioner again approached this Court by way of CMA No. 271/2011 in the 5above mentioned appeal (CIMA No. 312/2010) and because of the interim direction issued by this Court on 31.03.2011, he continued performing under the contract up to 07.04.2011 when, however, the interim direction ceased to operate due to withdrawal of appeal by the respondents. Fact of the matter, thus, precisely is that as against stipulated contract period of one year from 01.04.2010 to 31.03.2011 the petitioner could perform under the contract and earned revenue from 10.05.2010 to 07.04.2011 and in that petitioner is not wrong in saying that he worked 33 days less than the stipulated contract period of 365 days. He thus sought refund of proportionate auction amount for these 33 days, firstly, by the medium of OWP No. 743/2013 and now by the medium of the petition on hand in which he also questions order dated 12.08.2013 passed by respondent No. 3 in compliance with order dated 03.07.2013 passed by this Court in OWP No. 743/2013. Respondent No.3, by impugned order dated 12.08.2013, rejected petitioner’s claim holding it as not maintainable solely for the reason that petitioner himself was at fault for not fulfilling the terms and conditions of the Auction Notice. 15. Point sought to be demonstrated on behalf of the respondents is that petitioner by not issuing post dated cheques and bank guarantee to secure the payment of remaining 60% of the total auction amount was responsible for non-issue of allotment letter and allotment of contract in his favour up to 10.05.2011 and therefore is not entitled to claim recovery of proportionate auction amount. 16. It admits of no doubt that petitioner himself was responsible for delay in allotment of contract in his favour resulting into his inability to collect the revenue for initial period of 39 days, that is, from 01.04.2010 to 09.05.2010. Respondents cannot be said to have committed any wrong, illegality or breach of contract in not issuing allotment letter and allotting the contract to the petitioner from 01.04.2010 up to 09.05.2010. It was with the intervention and under the interim directions of this Court on 07.05.2010(supra) that the respondent No. 3 allotted the contract in favour of the petitioner on 10.05.2010 and he performed under the same up to 7. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 261 ---
2011. This, however, is one aspect of the matter and the other aspects, which are important nevertheless, are that stipulated period of the contract was twelve months, the, auction amount offered and paid by the petitioner was for the said period of twelve months and the petitioner could not collect the revenue for 32 days out of the said twelve months.” 611. The learned Single Judge recorded a categoric finding that it was the respondent herein who failed to comply with the requirements of the Clause-8 of the NIT because the five post-dated cheques and bank guarantee to secure the payment of the rest of the auction amount were not deposited by him leading to non- issuance of the work order. The respondent questioned the legality of the Clause-8 by filing a suit in the Court of learned District Judge, Reasi. The learned Single Judge categorically held that it was the failure of the respondent-bidder, due to which the allotment letter enabling him to start performing under the contract from 1st April, 2010 was not issued, which later came to be issued on 10th May, 2010 in compliance of the order dated 7th May, 2010 passed by the High Court. However, in spite of taking note of this unjustified action of the respondent leading to the non- issuance of the work order, the learned Single Judge went on to hold that the writ petitioner(respondent herein) was not wrong in saying that he had worked 33 days less than the stipulated contract period of 365 days and thus, he was entitled to payment of pro-rata auction amount for these days. 12. The learned Single Judge was persuaded by the equitable concept that a social welfare state where the Government has to 7play a key role in protecting and promoting the economic interest and social well-being of the citizens, it would not be entitled to or justified in earning undue benefit/profit from the citizens. Observing so, the learned Single Judge took upon himself to quantify the damages suffered by the bidder to be equivalent to net revenue collected by the appellant herein during first 32 days of contract period commencing from 1st April, 2010 after deducting expenses such as salaries and allied expenses and proceeded to direct the appellants to make payment thereof to the respondent herein. 13. The intra court appeal preferred by the appellants against the said order and the cross-appeal filed by the respondent seeking modification of the order passed by learned Single Bench and a direction upon the appellant to refund the total amount of Rs.71,06,276/- along with interest at 12% per annum without making any deductions, stand rejected by common judgment and final order dated 30th September, 2013. These orders are subjected to challenge at the instance of Municipal Committee, Katra and its officials in these appeals by special leave. 14. Learned counsel Shri Pashupathi Nath Razdan appearing on behalf of the appellants urged that admittedly, the respondent was 8responsible for non-issuance of the work order because he did not comply with the mandatory requirements contained in Clause-8 of NIT. Despite having participated in the auction proceedings with open eyes, the respondent pursuant to his second highest bid being accepted, challenged the conditions contained in Clause-8 of the NIT, by filing a civil suit. Owing to the reluctance shown by the respondent in accepting the tender conditions, the appellants herein were contemplating to quash the tender and to issue a fresh auction notice, but in compliance of the order dated 7th May, 2010, passed by the High Court, the work order dated 10th May, 2010 was awarded to the respondent. He submitted that there cannot be any dispute that the work under the contract was to run only till 31st March, 2011. The work was commenced by the respondent on 10th May, 2010 and the delay was due to his own conduct. He submitted that the High Court was not justified in entertaining the claim laid by the respondent in the writ petition which primarily was filed seeking award of damages in exercise of the writ jurisdiction. It was fervently contended that such a remedy could only have been availed by filing a suit for damages in the civil Court. His fervent contention was that the quantification of the amount, arrived at by the High Court to be awarded to the 9respondent by way of damages/compensation was not based on any logic or reasoning. He thus, implored the Court to accept the appeals and set aside the impugned judgments. 15. Per contra, Mr. Rakesh K. Khanna, learned senior counsel representing the respondent-writ petitioner, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the appellants’ counsel. He urged that admittedly, the auction notice was issued for one year, but despite that the respondent was not allowed to work for the entire period of 365 days in terms of NIT. For the shortfall of 33 days during which the respondent-writ petitioner was not allowed to work, the appellants themselves operated the work and thus, it can be presumed that they must have made profits out of the same. He urged that the respondent-writ petitioner was made to deposit the entire amount under the contract for the full period of 365 days in terms of the NIT. The appellant Municipal Committee operated the work and earned income for this period of 33 days and also charged the respondent- writ petitioner for the same period. By failing to pay to the respondent-writ petitioner the earnings for the period of these 33 days, the appellant was unduly enriched which is totally alien to the concept of a ‘welfare state’ guaranteed under the Constitution 10of India. He submitted that the High Court has assessed and quantified the damages suffered by the respondent by applying a logical reasoning and granted equitable relief after balancing the equities and hence, this Court should be loath to interfere in the matter. 16.

--- JUDGMENT 262 ---
Madan Lal Yadav 1 observing as below: - 1 (1996) 4 SCC 127 11“28. …In this behalf, the maxim nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria — meaning no man can take advantage of his own wrong — squarely stands in the way of avoidance by the respondent and he is estopped to plead bar of limitation contained in Section 123(2). In Broom's Legal Maxim (10th Edn.) at p. 191 it is stated: “… it is a maxim of law, recognised and established, that no man shall take advantage of his own wrong; and this maxim, which is based on elementary principles, is fully recognised in courts of law and of equity, and, indeed, admits of illustration from every branch of legal procedure.” The reasonableness of the rule being manifest, we proceed at once to show its application by reference to decided cases. It was noted therein that a man shall not take advantage of his own wrong to gain the favourable interpretation of the law. In support thereof, the author has placed reliance on another maxim frustra legis auxilium invocat quaerit qui in legem committit. He relies on Perry v. Fitzhowe [(1846) 8 QB 757 : 15 LJ QB 239] .

--- JUDGMENT 263 ---
At p. 192, it is stated that if a man be bound to appear on a certain day, and before that day the obligee puts him in prison, the bond is void. At p. 193, it is stated that “it is moreover a sound principle that he who prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of the non-performance he has occasioned”. At p. 195, it is further stated that “a wrong doer ought not to be permitted to make a profit out of his own wrong”. At p. 199 it is observed that “the rule applies to the extent of undoing the advantage gained where that can be done and not to the extent of taking away a right previously possessed”. 19. It is beyond cavil of doubt that no one can be permitted to take undue and unfair advantage of his own wrong to gain favourable interpretation of law. It is a sound principle that he who prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of the non- performance he has occasioned. To put it differently, ‘a wrong doer ought not to be permitted to make profit out of his own wrong’. The 12conduct of the respondent-writ petitioner is fully covered by the aforesaid proposition. 20. The respondent-writ petitioner participated in the tender process without raising any issue about Clause-8 of the auction notice. The highest bidder Shri. Pritam Das did not come forward to execute the contract thus, the respondent became the highest bidder and was offered the work in question. The respondent accepted the same with open eyes. However, in order to avoid full compliance of Clause-8 of auction notice, the respondent went on to file a civil suit. Having participated in the tender proceedings with open eyes, the respondent challenged the Clause-8 of the auction notice in the civil Court and thereby, stalled the issuance of the work order. The matter was taken to the High Court and the appellants gave a clear indication before the High Court that they were proposing to hold a fresh auction. However, during pendency of appeal before the High Court, an order dated 7th May, 2010 came to be passed whereby, the appellants were directed to award the work to the respondent being L-2. 21. We feel that once the respondent-writ petitioner had participated in the tender process being fully conscious of the terms and conditions of the auction notice, he was estopped from 13taking a U-turn so as to question the legality or validity of the terms and conditions of the auction notice. By dragging the matter to litigation, the respondent himself was responsible for the delay occasioned in issuance of the work order which deprived him of the opportunity to work for the entire period of 365 days. 22. Furthermore, the relief which was sought by the respondent in the writ petition was purely by way of damages. By no stretch of imagination, such relief could have been subject matter of extra ordinary writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The quantification of the damages would require entering into disputed questions of facts and hence, the High Court ought to have relegated the writ petitioner(respondent herein) to the competent Court for claiming damages, if so advised. 23. Law is well settled that disputes arising out of purely contractual obligations cannot be entertained by the High Court in exercise of the extra ordinary writ jurisdiction. In the case of Union of India and Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 264 ---
v. Puna Hinda2, this Court held as follows: - “24. Therefore, the dispute could not be raised by way of a writ petition on the disputed questions of fact. Though, the jurisdiction of the High Court is wide but in respect of pure contractual matters in the field of private law, having no statutory flavour, are better adjudicated upon by the forum agreed to by the parties. The dispute as to whether the amount is payable or not and/or how much amount is payable are 2 (2021) 10 SCC 690 14disputed questions of facts. There is no admission on the part of the appellants to infer that the amount stands crystallised. Therefore, in the absence of any acceptance of joint survey report by the competent authority, no right would accrue to the writ petitioner only because measurements cannot be undertaken after passage of time. Maybe, the resurvey cannot take place but the measurement books of the work executed from time to time would form a reasonable basis for assessing the amount due and payable to the writ petitioner, but such process could be undertaken only by the agreed forum i.e. arbitration and not by the writ court as it does not have the expertise in respect of measurements or construction of roads.” 24. In wake of discussion made herein above, this Court is of the firm view that the impugned judgments dated 20th February, 2015 and 30th September, 2015 are ex-facie illegal and without jurisdiction. Hence, the same deserve to be and are hereby quashed and set aside. 25. The appeals stand allowed. No order as to costs. 26. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. ………………….……….J.

--- JUDGMENT 265 ---
1 REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 377 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2991 OF 2024 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 4134 OF 2020) CHANDER BHAN (D) THROUGH LR SHER SINGH …APPELLANT VERSUS MUKHTIAR SINGH & ORS. …RESPONDENTS J U D G M E N T SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 1. The appeal filed by the appellant presently before us challenges the Judgement and order dated 03.10.2019, passed in a second appeal by the Punjab and Haryana High Court. The impugned Judgement of the High Court has reversed the concurrent findings of the trial court and the first appellate court and has consequently dismissed the suit of specific performance filed by the appellant-plaintiff, although a partial relief was granted to the appellant by return of the earnest money to the appellant, with interest.2 2. The facts leading to this appeal are that on 10.11.2002 appellant and respondent no. 3 entered an agreement to sell relating to 16 “Kanals” of land for a total consideration of Rs. 8 lakhs, where Rs. 2.50 lakhs was paid at the time of agreement and remaining Rs. 5.50 lakhs was to be paid at the time of execution of sale deed, which was to be executed on or before 10.11.2004. 3. After the agreement to sell but before the date of the execution of the sale deed the present appellant having received the knowledge that respondent no. 3 was likely to alienate the suit property, files a suit for permanent injunction on 21.07.2003 against respondent no. 3 where an order of temporary injunction was passed in his favour on 28.07.2003. On the very same day, i.e., 28.07.2003 respondent no. 3 though executes a “release deed” in favour of his son, Harvinder Singh (respondent no. 4), for which mutation was also sanctioned. 4. Subsequent to the Release Deed, respondent no. 4, son of respondent no.3, executed a registered sale deed3 dated 16.06.2004 in favour of Mukhitar Singh and Baljeet Singh (respondent nos. 1-2) for the suit land.

--- JUDGMENT 266 ---
5. The appellant then files a suit for specific performance before the Additional Civil Judge, Senior Division, Jind, as the defendant i.e. present respondent No.3 did not come forward even on the last day i.e. 10.11.2004 to execute the sale deed. In his Written Statement, respondent no. 3, takes the defence that the agreement for sale was signed by him, but under a “misconception”. It is contended that the appellant/plaintiff had taken the defendant to a shop for being a witness and had fraudulently obtained his signatures on the agreement to sell. Respondents 1 and 2, on the other hand, claimed to be bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration and sought protection under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (hereafter “Act of 1882”). 6. The Trial Court, nevertheless decreed the suit of the appellant with costs and directed respondent no. 3 to accept balance sale consideration and execute the agreement to sell. It was held that respondent no. 34 had admitted about the execution of the agreement to sell in the earlier suit for injunction filed by the appellant, and further Vijay Singh (PW-5) had verified the execution of the agreement. The Trial Court did not give any credence to the objections of the defendants (present respondents No. 3 and 4). Both these defendants, father and son respectively, had refused to depose in the witness box. An adverse inference was drawn against them by the Court, on this aspect as well. 7. An interesting development, meanwhile took place before the Trial Court. PW-7 who was the lawyer of the appellant in the injunction suit, had become an attesting witness of the “sale deed” executed by respondent no. 4 in favour of respondent nos. 1-2. The Trial Court, thus observed that from the deposition of PW-7 during cross-examination, PW-7 had committed a breach of privileged communication and violated Section 126 of the Evidence Act, 1872. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 267 ---
No appeal against this Judgement was filed by respondents 3 and 4. All the same, an Appeal was filed5 by respondents 1 and 2 before the Additional District Judge, Jind which was dismissed on 06.03.2012. While reiterating the findings of the Trial Court, the First Appellant Court had observed that since PW-7 was the attesting witness of the sale deed in favour of respondent 1-2 and also the advocate of the appellant in the injunction suit, therefore, it can be safely presumed that respondents 1-2 would have been aware of the injunction, and consequently their defence of bonafide purchaser can never be accepted. While dismissing the appeal, the Appellate Court observed that the respondents had colluded together to defeat the just claim of the plaintiff, i.e., the appellant before this Court. 9. Respondents 1-2 then filed their Second Appeal before the Punjab and Haryana High Court at Chandigarh, which was allowed vide order dated 03.10.2019, which is presently under challenge before us. The High Court in the impugned order has reversed the judgements of the trial court and the First Appellate Court, though it held that the plaintiff, i.e., the present appellant was6 entitled to the relief of refund of earnest money along with 8% interest per annum from date of agreement till date of judgement and 6% interest per annum from date of the date of judgement till realization of the amount. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 268 ---
Primarily three factors weighed with the High Court. Firstly, the Release Deed and order of temporary injunction were executed and passed on the same day i.e. 28.07.2003 and it was, therefore, not possible to determine that the Release Deed was in violation of the injunction order. Secondly, the suit for permanent injunction was ultimately dismissed as withdrawn so the protection afforded by the order of temporary injunction would subsume with the dismissal of the main suit. Thirdly, in the deposition and cross- examination of PW-7, there was no admission that he had informed respondents 1-2 about the order of temporary injunction in favour of the appellant. Although respondents 3 and 4 refused to depose in the witness box, yet respondents 1-2 had both appeared as a witness and from their deposition, it cannot be7 inferred that they were aware of the injunction order. Thus, the High Court concluded that respondents 1-2 were bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration and deserved protection under Section 41 of the Act of 1882. The relevant observations of the High Court are reproduced below: “In the suit for permanent injunction, land measuring 16 kanals out of khewat No. 322 khata No. 435 total measuring 86 kanal 14 marlas was the subject matter. Neither Harvinder Singh nor the present appellants were party to the said litigation. The interim injunction against alienation was allowed vide order dated 28.7.2003, the date a lawyer appeared on behalf of Iqbal Singh @ Pala Singh and filed memo of appearance. The release deed in favour of defendant No. 2 Harvinder Singh was executed by Iqbal Singh @ Pala Singh defendant No. 1 on 28.7.2003. There is no evidence on record as to the time when injunction order was passed by the trial court and the time when the release deed was executed and registered in favour of Harvinder Singh. This apart, sale in violation of an injunction order passed by the courts would not render the transaction void ab initio and, at best, proceedings under Order 39 Rule 2A of the Code can be initiated by the aggrieved party. There is nothing on record suggestive of the fact that respondent- plaintiff initiated any such proceedings against Iqbal Singh or Harvinder Singh. Moreover, the injunction order dated 28.7.2003 also lost its life the moment suit for permanent injunction was later8 dismissed in the year 2004. Counsel for the respondent-plaintiff has failed to cite any provision in law or a precedent that if suit property is transferred in favour of the vendor of a litigant claiming bona fide purchaser during pendency of earlier litigation, he is not entitle to protection under Section 41 of the TP Act irrespective of whether he was aware of pendency of that litigation or otherwise. The release deed in favour of defendant No. 2 and sale deed in favour of the appellants were subject to outcome of suit for injunction that was eventually dismissed by the Court. In this view of the matter, findings of the courts to reject plea of bona fide purchaser of the appellants on account of pendency of suit for permanent injunction are not based upon any legal ground, thus, unjustified.” 11. While allowing the second appeal, the High Court though has upheld the concurrent findings as to the execution of the agreement to sell, and that the appellant had paid Rs. 2.50 lakhs as earnest money to respondent no. 3. Consequently, the High Court gave the alternate relief to the appellant, as indicated above. 12. On behalf of the appellant, we have heard learned counsel Mr. Rameshwar Singh Malik, Sr. Advocate and Mr. Narender Hooda, Sr. Advocate on behalf of respondents 1-2. Though service by way of publication9 was done for respondents 3 and 4, they have not entered appearance. 13.

--- JUDGMENT 269 ---
Mr. Rameshwar Singh Malik, Sr. Adv on behalf of the appellant/plaintiff would on the other hand submit that the High Court committed a grave error in reversing the concurrent findings of the Courts below. The transaction qua the suit property was executed by the respondents after the appellant obtained an order10 of temporary injunction from the Trial Court, hence the entire transactions would be hit by lis pendens given under Section 52 of the Act of 1882. Even otherwise, the High Court has upheld the findings of the Courts below that the agreement to sell in favour of the appellant as well as the acceptance of earnest money was duly proved. Lastly, the respondent nos. 3 and 4 never preferred any appeal against the judgements passed by the lower courts so they have attained finality qua them, which is indicative of the collusion between the respondents. 15. In order to appreciate the rival contentions of the parties, it will be appropriate to reproduce the relevant provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the benefit of which is being claimed by both parties. Section 41 of the Act of 1882 which governs the principle of bonafide purchaser for valuable consideration is reproduced below: “41. Transfer by ostensible owner.— Where, with the consent, express or implied, of the persons interested in immovable property, a person is the ostensible owner of such property and transfers the same for consideration, the11 transfer shall not be voidable on the ground that the transferor was not authorised to make it: Provided that the transferee, after taking reasonable care to ascertain that the transferor had power to make the transfer, has acted in good faith.” Similarly, Section 52 of the Act of 1882 governs the principle of lis pendens and is reproduced below: “52. Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto.—During the [pendency] in any Court having authority [within the limits of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir] or established beyond such limits] by [the Central Government, of [any] suit or proceeding [which is not collusive and] in which any right to immovable property is directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or order which may be made therein, except under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it may impose. [Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date of the presentation of the plaint or the institution of the proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or proceeding has been12 disposed of by a final decree or order, and complete satisfaction or discharge of such decree or order has been obtained, or has become unobtainable by reason of the expiration of any period of limitation prescribed for the execution thereof by any law for the time being in force.]” 16. The object underlying the doctrine of lis pendens is for maintaining status quo that cannot be affected by an act of any party in a pending litigation. The objective is also to prevent multiple proceedings by parties in different forums. The principle is based on equity and good conscience. This Court has clarified this position in a catena of cases. Reference may be made here of some, such as: Rajendra Singh v. Santa Singh, AIR 1973 SC 2537; Dev Raj Dogra v. Gyan Chand Jain, (1981) 2 SCC 675; Sunita Jugalkishore Gilda v. Ramanlal Udhoji Tanna, (2013) 10 SCC 258. 17. It must be stated here though that by virtue of Section 1 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 the provisions of the said Act are not applicable in the States of Punjab, Delhi or Bombay; subject, of course to certain exceptions. Yet, in the case of Kanshi Ram v. Kesho Ram, AIR 1961 P&H 299 the Punjab and Haryana13 High Court has held that since the explanation to Section 52 is based on equity and good conscience this principle can be applicable. Recently, this Court in Shivshankara and Another v. H.P. Vedavyasa Char, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 358 held as follows: “….Even if it is taken for granted that the provisions under Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act are not applicable as such in the case on hand it cannot be disputed that the principle contained in the provision is applicable in the case on hand. It is a well- nigh settled position that wherever TP Act is not applicable, such principle in the said provision of the said Act, which is based on justice, equity and good conscience is applicable in a given similar circumstance, like Court sale etc…..” In short, there can be no doubt that even if Section 52 of T.P Act is not applicable in its strict sense in the present case then too the principles of lis-pendens, which are based on justice, equity and good conscience, would certainly be applicable. 18.

--- JUDGMENT 270 ---
Keeping this in mind, the explanation to Section 52 which was inserted by the Act No. XX of 1929, clarifies that pendency of a suit shall be deemed to have commenced from the date on which the plaintiff presents the suit. Further, that such pendency would14 extend till a final decree is passed and such decree is realised. 19. In the facts of the present case, the suit for permanent injunction was filed on 21.07.2003 which is prior to the execution of release deed, i.e., 28.07.2003. Thus, since the release deed is executed after the suit for temporary injunction was filed by the appellant, the alienation made by respondent no. 3 in favour of respondent no. 4 would be covered by the doctrine of lis pendens. 20. In other words, the appellant filed a suit for permanent injunction on 21.07.2003 and obtained an order of temporary injunction on 28.07.2003. As on 21.07.2003 the doctrine of lis pendens would take its effect. The release deed executed by respondent no. 3 in favour of respondent no. 4 was of 28.07.2003, which is subsequent to the filing of the suit. Respondent no. 4 executed the registered sale deed in favour of respondents 1-2 on 16.06.2004 which is during the operation of the temporary injunction order. Thus, the alienation made by respondents, cannot operate15 against the interests of the appellant considering he had obtained an order of temporary injunction in his favour. The same position has been held by this Court in a recent decision of Shivshankara and Another v. H.P. Vedavyasa Char (Supra), which has similar facts in the context of an injunction order. 21. Once it has been held that the transactions executed by the respondents are illegal due to the doctrine of lis pendens the defence of the respondents 1-2 that they are bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration and thus, entitled to protection under Section 41 of the Act of 1882 is liable to be rejected. 22. We are presently not getting into the deposition of PW-7 though it is unusual and also whether respondents 1-2 had knowledge of the injunction, even though we find no substantial reasons for the High Court to base its entire decision on the deposition of this witness (PW-7). We are going by the settled position that subsequent purchasers will be bound by lis pendens and cannot claim they are bonafide purchasers because they were not aware of the16 injunction order, looking at the peculiar facts of the present case. 23. Respondents 1-2 have also claimed they have made substantial alterations to the property by investing money and they have also installed a submersible pump. However, this cannot be the basis for the respondents to claim any sort of compensation or stake any sort of claim against the property. (See: Sardar Kar Bachan Singh v. Major S Kar Bhajan Singh, AIR 1975 P&H 205) 24. Consequently, the Release Deed dated 28.07.2003 executed by respondent no. 3 in favour of respondent no. 4 and the Sale Deed dated 16.06.2004 executed by respondent no. 4 in favour of respondents 1-2 is held to be without any legal sanctity. There was an order of temporary injunction operating at the time when these transactions were made and the alienation made by the respondents cannot operate to the disadvantage of the appellant. Since the parties to these proceedings are bound by the doctrine of lis pendens the17 respondents 1-2 cannot take the protection of bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration. 25. Consequently, this appeal is allowed, the Judgement dated 03.10.2019 passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in RSA No. 2746 of 2012 is set aside. The decree in favour of the appellant is upheld.

--- JUDGMENT 271 ---
467/2024 13. None of the material prosecution witnesses except PW-3 (Santosh), the deceased's brother, supported the prosecution. The rest of the alleged eyewitnesses were declared hostile. PW-1 was also declared hostile as she did not support the prosecution. However, after her recall, she supported the prosecution. SUBMISSIONS 4. The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants (accused no.2 to 6) in Criminal Appeal No.468/2024 pointed out that PW-1 did not support the prosecution. However, after a gap of 1½ years, she was recalled, and from her deposition after recall, it is apparent that the Police had compelled her to depose in a particular manner. Inviting our attention to the documents on record, the learned senior counsel submitted that the evidence of PW-1 must be disbelieved. Inviting our attention to the evidence of PW-3, he submitted that there are material omissions and contradictions brought on record in his evidence. For example, he pointed out that according to PW-3, he was sitting in his shop when the assault on the deceased was made. In the cross-examination, he stated that he had not shown the shop to the Investigation Officer. In the cross-examination, he accepted that he did not see the incident from his shop. The learned senior counsel also pointed out that the mahazar of the site drawn by the Investigation Officer shows that the shop was not in existence. He also pointed out that paragraph 9 of his cross-examination shows that the prosecution could not establish the alleged motive. CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.

--- JUDGMENT 272 ---
467/2024 25. The learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that while appreciating the evidence of PW-1, it must be remembered that she is a rustic woman who had lost her son. He submitted that when her evidence was earlier recorded, she was under a threat by the accused. He submitted that after she was recalled, she told the truth. His submission is that the Court should not discard the testimony of PW-1 as, ultimately, it is the testimony of a woman who has lost her son as a result of a brutal murder. He also pointed out that PW-1 is an injured eyewitness and, therefore, her testimony should not be discarded. He submitted that the Investigation Officer is not highly educated. Consequently, it is always possible that he would make mistakes while drawing the mahazar, showing the situation at the site where the offence occurred. Thus, too much importance should not be attached to the fact that he has not shown the shop's existence on the map drawn by him. Lastly, he submitted that it is a case of brutal murder and looking at the findings recorded by the Courts; leniency should not be shown to the appellants. OUR VIEW 6.

--- JUDGMENT 273 ---
We have carefully examined the material on the Trial Court’s record, including the testimonies of the witnesses. The Trial Court has supplied a translated version of the record. PW-1 stepped into the witness box on 2nd May 1997. She did not support the prosecution. Therefore, she was declared hostile on the prayer made by the learned Public Prosecutor. In the cross-examination made by the Public Prosecutor, she stated that she did not report the CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 3incident as she was unconscious. When confronted with the report, she stated that it was written by one Ramprakash Tiwari at Kotwali which bears her thumb impression. Surprisingly, the prosecution has not examined Ramprakash Tiwari as a witness. What is important is what she stated in paragraph 6 of her cross-examination made by the Public Prosecutor. Paragraph 6 reads thus: “6. These 6 men are detained in jail since 1.5 years. I was having rivalry with them, so I mentioned their names. I had wrongly mentioned names of accused. I did not complain to anyone that accused are wrongly detained on my report. It is wrong to say that me and my son had taken Rupees Eighty thousand from the accused and is not stating correctly in collusion with them. It is also wrong to say that accused present in Court had killed my son before me with axe, spear and sticks. It is also wrong to say that when I tried to save my son, accused Babu assaulted me.” (underlines supplied) 7. As stated earlier, her evidence was recorded on 2nd May, 1997. After that, there were two curious events. The first is that Malti Bai, the widow of the deceased, applied on 11 September 1998 to the Trial Court stating that she was an eye-witness, but the prosecution has not included her name in the list of witnesses. Therefore, she prayed that she may be examined as a witness. At this stage, we may note that in the evidence of PW-3, which was recorded on 19th December 1998, though he claimed that the widow of the deceased was present when the assault was committed, this statement is an omission. PW-1, after recall, did not depose about the presence of the widow of the deceased near the place of the incident. The prosecution did not take any steps to examine Malti CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 4Bai, the widow of the deceased, who was claiming to be an eyewitness. Even the trial court did not direct the police to record her statement and to examine her before the Court. The prosecution offered no explanation for not examining Malti Bai as a witness. Therefore, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the prosecution withheld the evidence of a material witness from the Court, which may be a ground for drawing an adverse inference against the prosecution. 8. The second event is that on 5th February 1999, nearly 01 year and 09 months from the date on which her deposition was recorded, PW-1 made an application to the Court stating that her statement given to the Police was true, but as the accused had threatened to kill her and PW-3, she did not support the prosecution. She stated that she desires to tell the truth before the Court. She filed an affidavit in support of her application on the same day. The Police made no investigation into the alleged threat administered by the accused to PW-1. As noted earlier, in her earlier deposition, in paragraph 6, she stated that the accused continued to be in jail for 1½ years. Her statement indicates that the accused were in jail till the day of her deposition. There is another crucial aspect. Two months before PW-1 submitted the application, PW-3 was examined before the Court on 19th December 1998. Though PW-1 claimed that the accused had threatened to kill PW-3, surprisingly, PW-3 did not depose about any such threat administered to him. CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 59. After the recall, PW-1 stepped into the witness box. What she stated in the witness box is very material. In paragraph 7, she stated thus: “7. My statement was recorded earlier in this District Court. I had stated correctly at that time. I was threatened after that. Accused had threatened me. I had given statement after that. Policemen had threatened me after that statement that why did you give wrong statement. I have come to give statement again on saying again by the police.

--- JUDGMENT 274 ---
After that, witness was told that say what you want. Witness stated "Hanna was carrying spear, Kappu had axe, Gaya had stick, Duli had stick, Prakash had stick, Babu had stick, Gaya held him and Hanna hit 4-5 times with spear, hit with axe, hit struck 4-5 times, hit 4-5 times with stick. Assaulted him in the middle of the road. Assaulted at Kailgawa. Had gone towards the river after assaulting. Killed my son when he had gone to defecate. We mother in law and daughter in law had gone to fetch water, killed him in 3 minutes. My son's head was in west side and feet were in east side when he died.” (underlines supplied) 10. It is very difficult to accept the prosecution case that PW-1 was threatened by the accused, and therefore, she did not support the prosecution on 2nd May 1997 when her evidence was recorded. The reasons for discarding the case of threat administered to PW-1 and PW-3 can be summarized as follows: (a) On 2nd May 1997, PW-1 deposed that the accused were in jail for 1½ years; (b) After a long gap of 01 year and 09 months, on 5th February 1999, for the first time, she came out with a case that threats were administered by the accused way back in May 1997; CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 6(c) Notwithstanding the statement of PW-1 in her application dated 5th February 1999 and the affidavit filed in support thereof on the same day, the Police made no investigation into the allegation made by PW-1; and (d) Though on 5th February 1999, PW-1 claimed that the accused had threatened to kill PW-3, in his evidence recorded on 19th December 1998, PW-3 did not depose anything about the threat administered to him. 11. What is more material is that PW-1 specifically stated after her recall that a threat was administered to her by the Police as she did not support the prosecution in her earlier evidence. Secondly, she stated that she had come before the Court to give a statement at the instance of the Police. Considering what we have held earlier, her statement before the Court after recall that she was threatened by the accused, cannot be believed. The only conclusion which can be drawn is that after recall, she was compelled by the Police to depose in a particular manner. The Trial Court and the High Court should have discarded her evidence recorded after the recall. In fact, the Trial Court should have seriously taken note of the threat administered by the Police to PW-1 and directed the Police Officials to look into the role played by the Policemen who were associated with the case. 12.

--- JUDGMENT 275 ---
Now, we turn to the evidence of PW-3. In paragraph 3 of his examination-in-chief, he stated that accused Kappu owed his family a sum of Rs.6,000/- (Rupees Six Thousand). As he had asked the CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 7accused - Kappu, to pay the money, the accused had beaten him. His specific case is that the accused murdered his brother because of this hostility. However, in paragraph 9 of his cross-examination, he stated that he did not tell the Police that accused - Kappu was liable to pay his family a sum of Rs.6,000/- (Rupees Six Thousand). Thus, the motive stated by PW-3 in his examination-in-chief is a significant omission which is so material that it amounts to contradiction. Therefore, the prosecution's case about the existence of motive has to be discarded. In paragraph 3 of his examination-in-chief, PW-3 also stated that one Ramprakash Tiwari wrote the report of the incident. As stated earlier, the said Ramprakash Tiwari has not been examined. 13. In the cross-examination, PW-3 stated that the accused killed his brother a few steps away from his shop, and he was in his shop when the assault was committed. He claimed that his mother (PW-1), sister-in-law (Malti Bai), and other witnesses were present. The statement that Malti Bai was present is an omission, as is evident from paragraph 6 of his cross-examination. Moreover, the shop from which the witness had allegedly seen the assault is not shown to be in existence in the sketch of the scene of the offence drawn by the Police. PW-3 admitted that he had not shown his shop to the Police. Later, he stated that he did not see the incident from his shop. Therefore, PW-3's evidence is full of material omissions and contradictions. It is very difficult to believe PW-3's testimony. 14. Therefore, it follows that the prosecution has not proved the guilt of the accused. Therefore, the Appeals must succeed. We set CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 467/2024 8aside the impugned judgments dated 26th August 2022 and 6th December 2007 passed by the High Court and the Trial Court. We set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellants. 15. The Appeals are allowed accordingly. 16. The appellant in Criminal Appeal No.467/2024 is on bail. His bail bonds stand cancelled. As far as the appellants (accused nos.2 to 6) in Criminal Appeal No.468/2024 are concerned, we direct that they shall be immediately set at liberty. ...................J.

--- JUDGMENT 276 ---
APPELLANT(S) VS. DR. ASKET SINGH & ORS. ... RESPONDENT(S) JUDGMENT Abhay S.Oka, J. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties. 2. The facts of the case are glaring. The respondents are the owners of the lands subject matter of these appeals. At the instance of the Ministry of Defence, acquisition proceedings were initiated under the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (for short "the 1952 Act"). A notice of acquisition under Section 7 of the 1952 Act was issued on 26th March, 1964 which was published in the State Government Gazette on 3rd April, 1964. The vesting of the acquired property was complete on publication of the notice in the official gazette. 13. The provisions for grant of compensation in respect of the acquired land are found in Section 8 of the 1952 Act. The first option provided therein is to fix the compensation by an agreement between the acquiring body and the owners. if there is no such agreement, under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 8, the Central Government is required to appoint an arbitrator for determining the amount of compensation payable. An offer for payment of compensation was made by the appellants belatedly after 12 years on 16th August, 1976. The respondents declined to accept the said offer. Therefore, the Land Acquisition Officer addressed a letter to the Government on 8th October, 1976 to appoint an arbitrator. Accordingly, the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur was appointed as the Arbitrator. Nearly 22 years thereafter on 8th May, 1998, the award was declared by the Arbitrator by which he came to the conclusion that the market value of the acquired land was Rs.150/- per Marla. 4. An appeal was preferred by the first respondent as well as by the present appellants for challenging the award of the Arbitrator. By the impugned judgment, the High Court held that the market value ought to be Rs.350/- per Marla which was determined in the cases of 2similarly situated acquired lands. As there was a gross and inordinate delay in completing the arbitral proceedings for determination of the market value, relying upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Harbans Singh Shanni Devi v. Union of India1 and Union of India v.

--- JUDGMENT 277 ---
v. Union of India & Ors.3, the High Court granted solatium at the rate of 30% of the market value and interest on the compensation amount at 9% and 15%. 5. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the appellants is that the relief of solatium and interest has been granted in earlier cases by this Court where there was a delay on the part of the Central Government in appointing an Arbitrator for determination of compensation. In this case, the delay is mainly in disposal of the arbitral proceedings. He, therefore, submitted that the High Court ought not to have awarded both solatium and interest. The learned counsel appearing for the first respondent pointed out that in terms of the impugned judgment, the first respondent has received the entire compensation amount about 7 years 1. decided on 11th February, 1985 in Civil Appeal No.470-471 of 1985 2. (2003) 5 SCC 568 3. (2010) 14 SCC 357 3back. 6. It will be useful to refer to paragraphs 9 and 10 of the decision of this Court in the case of Dilawar Singh3 which reads thus: "9. It is common ground that the provisions of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 do not make any provision for the grant of solatium or interest to the expropriated landowners. The absence of any such provision in the said act was in fact made a basis for a challenge to the constitutional validity of the enactment which was repelled by this Court in Union of India v. Hari Krishan Khosla4. This Court pointed out that any comparison between acquisition made under the Requisitioning and acquisition Act would be odious in view of the dissimilarities between the two enactments. That decision was followed in subsequent pronouncements of this Court in Union of India v. Chajju Ram2 where a similar attack was mounted against the constitutional validity of the Defence of India Act, 1971 but repelled by this Court relying upon the decision in Hari Krishan Khosla4. 10. What is noteworthy is that in both these matters this Court had made a distinction between cases in which there was inordinate delay in the appointment of an arbitrator and consequent delay in the determination of the amount of compensation payable to the owners and other case 4. 1993 Supp (2) SCC 149 4where there was no such delay. In para 79 of the judgment of this Court in Hari Krishan Khosla4, this Court observed: "79. This is a case in which for 16 years no arbitrator was appointed. We think it is just and proper to apply the principle laid down in Harbans Singh Shanni Devi v. Union of India1. The Court held as under: Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case and particularly in view of the fact that the appointment of the arbitrator was not made by the Union of India for a period of 16 years, we think this is a fit case in which solatium at the rate of 30% of the amount of compensation and interest at the rate of 9% per annum should be awarded to the appellants. We are making this order having regard to the fact that the law has in the meanwhile been amended with a view to providing solatium at the rate of 30% and interest at the rate of 9% per annum." 7. As noted in the said decision, there is no provision for grant of solatium and interest under the 1952 Act. 58. It is true that the right to hold immovable property is no longer a fundamental right but it is a right under Article 300A of the Constitution of India. Considering the peculiar provisions of the 1952 Act, the land owned by the first respondent stood vested in the Central Government on 3rd April, 1964. Therefore, the compensation ought to have been paid to the first respondent within a reasonable time from 3rd April, 1964. Under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 8, there is a provision to decide the amount of compensation by an agreement. Such agreement could have been arrived at, provided the Central Government had submitted their proposal or offer to the first respondent. However, the offer was actually made by the Collector in August, 1976. Thus, there was no attempt made by the Central Government to bring about the consensus on the market value for a period of more than 12 years. Inordinate time of 12 years was taken by the Government to offer compensation to the first respondent. We must record here that this delay of more than 12 years is attributable solely to the Central Government. After the Arbitrator was appointed on 8th October, 1976, it took slightly less than 20 years to conclude the proceedings. There is nothing placed on record to show that the proceedings were delayed due to 6any conduct attributable to the first respondent. The delay in appointing the arbitrator must be attributed to the Central Government, as the Central Government took 12 years to offer compensation. In effect, market value prevailing on the date of acquisition was paid to the owners after lapse of more than 30 years from the date of vesting. 9. After having perused the aforesaid decisions of this Court, we find that as there are no provisions under the 1952 Act to compensate the owner for the delay in making payment of compensation, a direction was issued by this Court that in such cases, solatium and interest must be paid by the Central Government. The main reason for taking the said view is that the compensation must be paid to the owner of the acquired property within a reasonable time from the date on which the acquired property vested in the acquiring body. The requirement of making payment of compensation within a reasonable time from the date of vesting must be read into the 1952 Act. In fact, such a long delay of 12 years even in offering compensation will attract arbitrariness which is prohibited by Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The first respondent had an option of even seeking quashing of the acquisition on the ground of this 7arbitrariness which may have violated his rights under Article 300A of the Constitution of India. 10. Considering the huge delay involved in payment of compensation, the High Court has rightly granted solatium and interest in terms of the decisions of this Court. In fact, we are surprised to note that the appellants have dragged the first respondent to this Court. There is absolutely no merit in these appeals. As the first respondent has been paid compensation 7 years back, we are refraining from imposing costs. 11.

--- JUDGMENT 278 ---
The pith and substance of the allegations set out in the FIR is that respondent No. 5-Barkat Ali i.e. the complainant, had purchased the land bearing Survey No. 559/1Chh/30 admeasuring 21 decimals situated at Ashok Nagar, Khamtarai Bilaspur from one Geeta Rai, for a consideration of Rs. 25,00,000/. A registered sale deed for 10 decimals of the said land was executed on 20th December, 2017. The complainant came into possession of the said land. The adjacent plot admeasuring 12 decimals, was purchased by one Sushma Kashyap, wife of Rajkumar Kashyap from the land owner Geeta Rai in the year 2016. The complainant and Sushma Kashyap were allegedly in possession of their respective plots and had raised construction of houses thereupon. The complainant alleged that he had built a boundary wall for the protection of his plot with a gate and grill and that he had stored cement, rods and other construction materials on the plot. It was alleged that accused Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur and appellant- Shivendra Pratap Singh Thakur @ Banti, in furtherance of their common intention prior to 20th May, 2019, trespassed into the land in possession of the complainant and demolished the under 2construction house of Sushma Kashyap and the boundary wall of the complainant-Barkat Ali. The accused also stole raw materials kept at the complainant’s land thereby, causing loss of Rs.4 lakhs and Rs. 6 lakhs to Sushma Kashyap and the complainant, respectively. 4. The complainant confronted the accused about their criminal acts, on which the accused threatened the complainant of dire consequences in presence of witnesses Uma, Shankar Sahu, Vishnu Sahu and other labourers. On the basis of this report, an FIR No. 590 of 2019 came to be registered at P.S. Sarkanda, District Bilaspur for the offences punishable under Sections 447, 427, 294, 506 read with Section 34 of the IPC. Upon conclusion of investigation, the Investigating Officer, proceeded to file a charge sheet for the offences punishable under Sections 447, 427, 294, 506 read with Section 34 of the IPC against the accused persons showing them to be absconding. 5. The co-accused-Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur and appellant- Shivendra Pratap Singh Thakur @ Banti initially filed a writ petition being WPCR No. 10 of 2020 seeking quashing of the aforesaid FIR and the criminal case registered in pursuance thereof. The said writ petition was, however, not pressed with liberty to take recourse 3to the appropriate remedy against the charge sheet. Thereafter, the appellant and co-accused Saurabh Pratap Singh filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) before the High Court of Chhattisgarh for quashing of the said FIR and the charge sheet which stands rejected vide order dated 2nd August, 2023. The said order is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 6. Learned counsel representing the appellant urged that the entire case setup by the complainant in the FIR is false and fabricated. The land owner Sushma Kashyap whose under construction house was allegedly demolished/damaged by the appellant did not approach the police for lodging a complaint regarding the so called criminal act allegedly committed by the accused on her property. When the site inspection memo was prepared, the Investigating Officer did not find any damage to the boundary wall on Barkat Ali’s plot as had been alleged in the FIR. It was further contended that the impugned FIR and the charge sheet filed as a consequence thereof deserve to be quashed because on a plain reading of the charge sheet, the ingredients of the offences alleged are not made out. 47. Learned counsel urged that the appellant had lodged FIR No. 227 of 2014 against one Satraj Ali who is the panchnama witness of the complainant and that the present FIR is nothing but a counterblast to the FIR registered at the instance of the appellant. 8. Learned counsel further submitted that the incident is alleged to have taken place some time prior to 20th May, 2019 whereas, the FIR had been lodged on 29th June, 2019 and no explanation has been furnished for this gross delay in lodging of the FIR. He also pointed out that the complainant was not even sure of the date on which the offences were allegedly committed and that is why, the date of the incident has been mentioned in the FIR and the charge sheet as some time prior to 20th May, 2019 which clearly indicates that the allegations made by the complainant are totally vague and uncertain and unworthy of credence. 9. Learned counsel thus, implored the Court to accept the appeal and quash the FIR and consequential charge sheet filed against the appellant. 10. Per contra, learned counsel representing the State of Chhattisgarh vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the appellant’s counsel. He urged that the complainant had no motive to falsely implicate the accused- 5appellant. Investigation was conducted by the Investigating Officer and during the course of the collection of evidence, the statements of complainant-Barkat Ali, Sushma Kashyap and so also her husband-Rajkumar Kashyap were recorded wherein, they fully affirmed the allegations levelled in the FIR. 11. He thus, urged that the appellant herein has failed to make out a case for interference in the impugned order and the charge sheet. 12. No one has appeared to contest the matter on behalf of respondent No. 5 i.e., complainant-Barkat Ali. 13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material placed on record.

--- JUDGMENT 279 ---
14. A bare perusal of the impugned FIR would reveal that the same was lodged by complainant-Barkat Ali on 29th June, 2019 with the allegation that the offences alleged were committed by the appellant and co-accused some time prior to 20th May, 2019. Thus, the complainant was not even sure of the date on which the alleged offences were committed. No reason whatsoever has been given in the FIR for huge delay of more than 39 days in approaching the police. The Investigating Officer prepared a site plan during the 6course of investigation which has been made a part of the record. A perusal of the said site plan would reveal that so far as the plot of Purnima Begum, wife of Barkat Ali is concerned, it is fully encumbered by a boundary wall and no damage is shown to this structure. The site plan indicates that there is some damage to the under-construction house of Sushma Kashyap. In the FIR, the damage suffered by the complainant was quantified at Rs. 6 lakhs whereas the damage suffered by Smt. Sushma Kashyap was quantified as Rs. 4 lakhs owing to the demolition of her under construction house. However, admittedly, Smt. Sushma did not lodge any complaint to the police. 15. On going through the contents of the FIR, we do not find any material therein which can justify invocation of the offence punishable under Section 294 IPC. Except for the offence under Section 447 IPC, all the remaining offences are non-cognizable whereas the offence under Section 294 IPC is ex facie not made out from the allegations set out in the FIR and the charge sheet. The allegation levelled by the complainant that the accused demolished the boundary wall constructed on the land in his possession has not been found to be substantiated during spot inspection. 716. Neither Sushma Kashyap nor her husband-Rajkumar Kashyap lodged any complaint regarding the so-called criminal activity committed by the appellant and the co-accused on their land. The site plan further indicates that the plot of the co-accused Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur is immediately adjoining the plots of complainant-Barkat Ali and Sushma Kashyap. It is thus, apparent that there is an imminent possibility of animus between the complainant and the accused persons on this count. The FIR which was lodged after 39 days of the incident, does not indicate the date or time, when the accused trespassed into the house of the complainant and caused damage to his property and committed the other offences for which the FIR came to be registered. Therefore, we are of the view that the impugned FIR seems to be nothing but a tool to wreak vengeance against the appellant herein. 17. In this background, we feel that it is a fit case warranting exercise of powers conferred upon this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution of India so as to quash the proceedings of the criminal case. 818. As a result, impugned FIR No. 590 of 2019 and all subsequent proceedings sought to be taken thereunder are hereby quashed and set aside. 19. The appeal is allowed in these terms. 20. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. .………………………….……….J.

--- JUDGMENT 280 ---
2. The applicant herein approached the Madhya Pradesh High Court by filing Writ Petition No. 14478 of 2006 seeking a direction to the respondents to favourably consider the prayer of the applicant. Vide order dated 22nd November, 2006, the Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court permitted the applicant to approach the Central Empowered Committee(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CEC’) constituted under the directions given by this Court in Writ Petition(Civil) No. 202 of 1995. Consequently, the applicant preferred an application to the CEC seeking permission to construct the health/eco-resort on the land mentioned above asserting that the said chunk of land was not a forest land and had been acquired under valid title deeds and thus, the prayer for permission to construct may be allowed. However, the prayer made by the applicant was not accepted whereupon, the applications under consideration came to be filed before this Court. 3. The State Government had previously taken a stand in its counter that the land in issue falls within the limits of Pachmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary and therefore, by virtue of the directions issued 2by the CEC vide letter dated 2nd July, 2004, no commercial activity was permissible thereupon, without the permission of this Court. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 281 ---
DATE EVENT 1. 01.06.1977 The Government of Madhya Pradesh notified Pachmarhi Sanctuary under Section 18(1) of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 but did not specify/demarcate the area to be included/excluded in the Sanctuary. 2. 01.05.1991 The owner of the plots in question, Mr. Dennis Torry obtained permission to sale from the Government of Madhya Pradesh as required under Clause 16 of Chapter-IV Part 1 of Revenue Book Circular issued by the Government of Madhya Pradesh. 3. 13.09.1991 The applicant purchased the subject plots of land vide sale deed dated 13th September,1991. 4. 10.05.1996 In light of order dated 10th May,1996 passed by this Court in W.P.(C) No.262 of 1995, the State Government issued instructions to the Collector to expedite the proceedings of settlement of rights in National Parks/Sanctuaries. 5. 23.10.1996 In compliance of the abovementioned order, Collector, Hoshangabad made a proclamation 3under Section 21 of the Wild Life(Protection) Act, 1972 inviting claims from the affected persons. 6. 20.06.2000 After inviting claims and hearing the objections, Collector, Hoshangabad passed various orders determining the rights of the affected people and vide order dated 20th June, 2000, Civil/Nazul area of Pachmarhi Town was excluded from the Sanctuary. 7. 15.12.2000 Application was preferred by the applicant seeking mutation based on registered sale deed dated 13th September, 1991. The SDO directed the same to be mutated in the name of M/s Shewalkar Developers Ltd., through Ashutosh Shewalkar. 8. 2002 PIL bearing W.P No. 5937 of 2002 was filed before the High Court seeking directions to stop illegal construction activities in reserved/protected area at Pachmarhi, wherein a six-member Committee was constituted to examine the issue. 9. 15.01.2004 The High Court vide interim order passed in W.P. No. 5937 of 2002, directed that the order of exclusion of Cantonment and Civil/Nazul area of Pachmarhi Town and 33 revenue villages from the Pachmarhi Sanctuary and settlement of rights passed by the District Collector, Hoshangabad shall remain stayed until further orders. 10. 2005 The report of six-member Committee suggested that Nazul area within the administrative control of SADA and army cantonment area falling in Pachmarhi plateau may be considered to be deleted from the boundary of the Sanctuary. 11. 31.03.2005 The State Government following the advice of the State Wildlife Advisory Board moved the Government of India for seeking approval of National Board for Wildlife(NBWL) for excluding these areas. 12. 24.10.2005 The Standing Committee of the NBWL, vide letter dated 24th October, 2005, recommended exclusion of cantonment and Civil/Nazul Area. 413. 2006 The applicant approached the High Court by filing W.P(C) No. 14478 of 2006, being aggrieved by inaction of the respondents in deciding the application seeking permission to construct health/eco-resort on the subject plots of land. 14. 22.11.2006 The High Court permitted the applicant to move an application before the CEC. 15. 22.02.2007 The applicant preferred an application before the CEC being I.A No. 1008 of 2007. 16. 19.09.2008 The CEC submitted a report dated 16th/19th September, 2008 before this Court, in IA Nos.2202-2203 of 2007, filed by the Cantonment Board. 17. 29.03.2010 The CEC considered the application filed by the applicant seeking permission to construct health/eco-resort and observed that an affidavit dated 1st February, 2010 has been filed by the State Government clearly stating that the applicant’s land falls within the Sanctuary and was purchased in violation of the Wild Life(Protection) Act, 1972. The CEC also intimated the applicant that no recommendation could be passed by it in absence of an order passed by the Supreme Court. I.A. No.2930 of 2010 CAME TO BE FILED BEFORE THIS COURT S.No. DATE EVENT 1. 2010 Aggrieved by the order of CEC, the applicant approached this Court by filing I.A. No.2930 of 2010.

--- JUDGMENT 282 ---
2. 2011 Government of Madhya Pradesh filed an affidavit before this Court stating that Pachmarhi Township may be excluded from the forest area of Pachmarhi Sanctuary so that difficulties of the residents of Pachmarhi Township can be sorted out. 3. 12.08.2013 This Court accepted the recommendations of the CEC for excluding 395.939 Ha. land of 5Civil/Nazul area from the sanctuary in which the subject plots are situated. 4. 15.04.2017 The applicant moved I.A. No.3963 of 2017, seeking to place additional documents on record depicting functional resorts and hotels around the area where the applicant’s plot is situated. 5. 09.08.2017 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change issued ESZ notification. 6. 16.04.2018 This Court de-tagged I.A. Nos.2929-2931 of 2010 filed by the applicant herein from other I.A.s concerning the cantonment area. 7. 04.10.2018 This Court allowed the application for impleadment for the purposes of directions and the application to place additional documents on record. 8. 19.08.2019 The State Government was directed to file reply to the interlocutory applications. 9. 27.09.2019 This Court directed that response be filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh as well as by the CEC. 10. 13.11.2019 The CEC was directed to examine the matter and submit its report. 11. 16.06.2020 The CEC filed its report before this Court, in terms of orders passed by this Court objecting to the permission sought for by the applicant for constructing health/eco-resort on the plots. 12. 22.11.2023 This Court directed the Collector, Hoshangabad to file an affidavit annexing therewith a map of the aforesaid area of 395.939 hectares specifying as to whether the land belonging to the applicant(s) is within those 395.939 hectares or beyond it. The applicant was directed to place on record as to whether it has obtained the necessary permission for acquiring the land. 13. 13.04.2023 The applicant moved I.A. No.79064 of 2023, seeking leave to amend the I.A. No.2930 of 2010, in light of the CEC report dated 16th June, 2020. 14. 12.02.2024 The State Government filed compliance affidavit in terms of order dated 22nd November, 2023. 65. Another litigation took place regarding other transactions of land done by Dennis Torry and it will be essential to trace the history thereof. Chronological list of events in relation to the plot are being narrated hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 5.1 The District Collector, Hoshangabad registered suo moto revisions against the mutation orders issued in favour of Kripa Torry and Sanjay Bhandari(purchasers of land from Dennis Torry) and vide order dated 9th August, 2004, these revisions were allowed holding that the transfer of land by the perpetual land holder Rodrigues in favour of Dennis Torry on 8th September, 1977 was illegal and without force of law and thus, mutation of land in favour of Dennis Torry was illegal. The transfer and consequent mutation in favour of Sanjay Bhandari and Shri Kripa Torry(son of Dennis Torry) was quashed and set aside by the District Collector vide order dated 9th August, 2004. 5.2 The aforesaid order was challenged by the purchasers by filing an appeal to the Board of Revenue, Madhya Pradesh which came to be allowed and the order dated 9th August, 2004 passed by the District Collector was quashed by learned 7Single Member, Board of Revenue vide order dated 16th April, 2007. 5.3 The Chairman of Revenue Board registered a suo moto revision and vide order dated 15th March, 2011, set aside the order passed by the learned Single Member. 5.4 The land owners Shri Sanjay Bhandari and Shri Kripa Torry preferred a Writ Petition No. 8098 of 2011 for questioning the legality of order dated 15th March, 2011 and the said writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court vide order dated 3rd January, 2014 thereby, reversing the order dated 15th March, 2011 passed by the Board of Revenue. 6. This Court is apprised that the State has preferred an appeal(Writ Appeal No. 2100 of 2019) against the order passed by the learned Single Judge which is still pending adjudication and no order of stay is passed in the said writ appeal. 7. The CEC has submitted a report dated 16th June, 2020 in these proceedings objecting to the permission sought by the applicant. The applicant has also filed objection to the report of the CEC. 88. The issue which has now been raised by the State of Madhya Pradesh is with respect to the identification of the land owned by the applicant contending that the same forms a part of the Pachmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary. Considering the above contention, this Court raised the following query on 22nd November, 2023: - “2. We, therefore, direct the Collector, Hosangabad to file an affidavit annexing therewith a map of the aforesaid area of 395.939 hectares and also specify as to whether the land belonging to the applicant(s) is within those 395.939 hectares or beyond that area.” 9. In compliance of the said direction, an affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh(also referred to as, ‘compliance affidavit’). The relevant portions thereof are extracted hereinbelow: - “2. That, this Hon'ble Court has raised following queries to the respondent/State of M.P.:- (i) To annex the map demarcating an area of 395.939 hectares of the Nazul Land falling in the Panchmarhi Plateau, which was to be excluded from the Panchmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary as per order dated 12.08.2013 passed by this Hon'ble Court in I.A. No.2202-2203. In respect of aforesaid, it is pertinent to mention here that the said map demarcating an area of 395.939 hectares of Nazul Land falling in the Panchmarhi Plateau, the Plot No.14/3 area 59255 sq. ft.

--- JUDGMENT 283 ---
and 49365 sq. ft. total area 108900 sq. ft. is situated in Panchmarhi and recorded as maintenance Khasra in the Government of M.P. The plot No.14/3, 14/4 is within the area of 395.939 hectares which was excluded from the Panchmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary. 2. That, it is respectfully submitted that in respect of Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 a report was sought from Sub-Divisional Officer, Revenue, Pipariya whereby it was reported that Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 are recorded in name of State of M.P. in Sheet No.20 of Nazul Maintenance Khasra No.2023-24, said land of Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 is vacant on the spot, there is no kind of construction over there, said plots are situated under urban area of Panchmarhi. Moreover, the permission for construction/re-construction in the Cantonment Board, Panchmarhi lies under the jurisdiction of Chief Executive Officer, Cantonment Board, Panchmarhi and the permission for construction/re-construction in the Special Area Development Authority (SADA), Panchmarhi lies with the jurisdiction of Chief Executive Officer, Special Area Development Authority (SADA), Pachmarhi, In respect of above, no permission for construction/re- construction was issued by the Tehsildar, Pipariya. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 284 ---
That, on 03.01.2014, the Hon'ble High Court of M.P. at Jabalpur passed an order in W.P. No.8098/2018 in petition filed by Kripa Tori and others challenging the order dated 15.03.2011 of the Board of Revenue. The Hon'ble High Court set aside the order dated 15.03.2011 and thereby restored the previous order dated 22.07.1995 whereby the order of the Nazul Adhikari had been affirmed. A true copy of the order dated 03.01.2014 passed by the Hon'ble High Court of M.P. at Jabalpur in Writ Petition No.8098/2011 is being marked and filed herewith as Annexure A-9. It is pertinent to mention here that the aforesaid order dated 03.01.2014 of the Hon'ble High Court is in respect of Plot No.14/1 and 14/2 whereas the applicant herein is claiming relief in respect of Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 which were purchased by Ashutosh S/o Shriram Shewalkar and M/s Shewalkar Developers Pvt. Ltd. on 13.09.1991. The said Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 at present are recorded in the name of State of M.P. as Nazul Land. The State of Madhya being aggrieved with the order dated 03.01.2014 has filed an appeal before the Division Bench 10of the Hon'ble High Court which is pending adjudication as Writ Appeal No.2100/2019. 9. That, it is submitted here that the said proceedings before the Hon'ble High Court pertains to Kripa Tori &Ors. and the present intervenor M/s Shewalkar Developers was not a party before any of the Revenue Courts or the High Courts. 10. That, as per notification dated 19.08.2017, the area under the entire Pachmarhi region admeasuring 1532.521 hectares has been declared as "Eco-sensitive Zone" and the Plot No.14/3 and 14/4 fall within the notified boundaries of said notification. 11. That, in view of notification dated 09.08.2017 "no new resort can be constructed and only repairs etc. can be done". Moreover, the Hon'ble High Courtvide interim order dated 01.11.2002 in W.P. No.5937/2002 stayed the construction by making following observation:- "Subject to hearing other side, further construction in and around Pachmarhi Hill Resort is stayed till further order". The aforesaid clarification about stay order being applicable only to new construction has been reiterated by the Hon'ble High Court in its order dated 22.01.2004 in following words:- “By further order dated 13.07.2004, the interim order was clarified that the order of stay will not come in the way of repairing of roads by the State or carrying out repairs to existing building by respective provided, however, that repairs work of any building can be undertaken only after taking due permission from the concerned authority.”” (emphasis supplied) 10. Shri D.S. Naidu, learned senior counsel representing the applicant drew the Court’s attention to the order dated 15th December, 2000 passed by the Department Officer(SDO), Pipariya on the application preferred by the applicant seeking mutation based on a registered sale deed dated 13th September, 1991 executed by the land owner Dennis Torry in favour of the applicant. The SDO accepted the said application taking note of 11the fact that Plot No.14 admeasuring 3,23,365 sq. ft. was entered in the name of Dennis Torry who sought and was granted permission to sell the plot in question, by the Government of Madhya Pradesh vide order dated 1st May, 1991. Thereafter, by a registered sale deed dated 13th September, 1991, Dennis Torry had sold the subject plots of land to Ashutosh Shewalkar on behalf of the applicant company. Consequently, the SDO directed that the land sold by Dennis Torry should be mutated in the name of M/s Shewalkar Developers Ltd. through Ashutosh Shewalkar, resident of Nagpur. There is no dispute that the aforesaid order passed by the jurisdictional Revenue Officer in favour of the applicant has not been questioned in any Court of law. 11. Shri Naidu also drew the Court’s attention to the report of the CEC dated 16th June, 2020, as per which the permission to construct has been denied to the applicant on the ground that the State of Madhya Pradesh had filed an affidavit stating that the land falls in the Pachmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary and that the same had been purchased in violation of the provisions of the Wild Life(Protection) Act, 1972. 12. Shri Naidu contended that this objection raised by the State with reference to the Eco Sensitive Zone(hereinafter being referred 12to as ‘ESZ’) notification dated 9th August, 2017 is totally against the material available on record. He drew the Court’s attention to the site map dated 26th December, 2023(Annexure A-1 annexed with the compliance affidavit dated 12th February, 2024 filed by the respondent-State of Madhya Pradesh) to contend that as a matter of fact, the land owned by the applicant is located right on the periphery of the Nazul land, at a distance of about 10 kms. from the forest area and therefore, the same is well beyond the ESZ area. 13. Shri Naidu further submitted that in view of the categoric assertion made in the compliance affidavit dated 12th February, 2024, filed on behalf of the State, it is clear that the plots in question are located in the urban area of Pachmarhi and thus, there is no question of these plots being covered either under the wildlife sanctuary or the ESZ area. He thus urged that the applicant deserves the relief sought for.

--- JUDGMENT 285 ---
K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus Curiae appearing on behalf of the CEC submitted that in view of the ESZ notification dated 9th August, 2017, permission to raise a new construction on the land in question cannot be granted and whatever permissions are sought for, have to be routed through the CEC. 17. Learned counsel appearing for the Union of India adopted the submissions advanced by the standing counsel for the State and learned Amicus Curiae. 18. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material placed on record. 19. It is not in dispute that the applicant herein was never impleaded in any of the proceedings before the Revenue Courts or the High Court as has been emphatically stated in Para-9 of the 14compliance affidavit dated 12th February, 2024. It is thus, clear that irrespective of the fact that the order passed by the District Collector dated 9th August, 2004, purportedly covers entire area of the Plot No. 14 and the transactions done in favour of and by Dennis Torry, the sale deed executed in favour of the applicant and the mutation made in its name had never been questioned in any Court of law. Neither the Revenue Department nor the State Government authorities took the trouble of impleading the applicant as party in any of the abovementioned litigations. The title acquired by the applicant over the subject plots not having been challenged, attainted finality and thus the State cannot claim a right thereupon simply because at some point of time, the plots came to be recorded as Nazul lands in the revenue records. The categoric stand in the compliance affidavit filed by the State(reproduced supra) fortifies the claim of the applicant that these plots are falling under the urban area. 20. In this background, the applicant is justified in claiming that its proprietary rights guaranteed under Article 300A of the Constitution of India cannot be infringed merely on account of the pending writ appeal before the Madhya Pradesh High Court. 1521. Resultantly, we are of the firm opinion that the permission sought by the applicant for raising construction of health/eco- resort cannot be opposed only on account of pendency of the writ appeal before the Madhya Pradesh High Court. However, it can be said without a cavil of doubt that activities, if any, on the Plot Nos. 14/3 and 14/4 purchased by the applicant from Dennis Torry would have to be carried out strictly in accordance with the ESZ notification dated 9th August, 2017, issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. Nonetheless, the applicant would be at liberty to satisfy the authorities that the plots in question are beyond the Eco-Sensitive Zone. 22. Furthermore, since the writ appeal pending before the Madhya Pradesh High Court arises out of the orders passed in relation to the title rights of Dennis Torry, from whom the applicant purchased the plots in question, the activities, if any, undertaken by the applicant on the said plot of land would also remain subject to the outcome of the said writ appeal. 23. We, therefore, direct that the application filed by the applicant for raising construction on plot Nos. 14/3 and 14/4 shall be decided objectively by the CEC/Competent Authority of the 16local body keeping in view the location of the land with reference to the notified boundaries of the ESZ. 24. While deciding the application filed by the applicant, the authorities shall also bear in mind the fact that it is the pertinent case presented before this Court that a large number of resorts of Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation and Special Area Development Authority(SADA) are existing on areas abutting the land owned by the applicant. 25. The application/s shall be decided within a period of two months from today. Needless to say, that in the event of any adverse orders being passed, the applicant shall be at liberty to challenge the same as per law. 26. The applications are disposed of in above terms. No order as to costs. ………………….……….J. (B.R. GAVAI) ………………………….J. (SANDEEP MEHTA) New Delhi; May 16, 2024 17

--- JUDGMENT 286 ---
1. This is plaintiff’s appeal arising out of a suit for possession and confirmation of his possession over the suit land which was decreed in his favour by the court of first instance but the decree was set aside in First Appeal and was affirmed by the High Court. 2. The dispute in the suit is regarding 0.32 decimal of land of R.S.P. No.821 situate in village Kishanpur, district Sit- amarhi, Bihar. This area of land was carved out from C.S.P. 1No.332 of Khata No.196 which belonged to Rambati Kuwer, the ex-landlord. 3. The aforesaid ex-landlord Rambati Kuwer settled the above area of the suit land in favour of Makhan Singh, son of late Ram Govind Singh vide lease deed (patta) of 1341 fasli whereupon the said Makhan Singh continued in possession of it during his lifetime. The said Makhan Singh had no is- sue. It is alleged that he adopted plaintiff-appellant who in- herited the suit land after Makhan Singh. Accordingly, plaintiff-appellant is presently in possession of the suit land which had been in his family’s possession ever since it was settled by ex-landlord Rambati Kuwer in favour of Makhan Singh. 4. It so happened that the village was brought under consolid- ation in accordance with the Bihar Consolidation of Uphold- ings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 19561. 5. Since the aforesaid land was incorrectly recorded in the name of the State, the plaintiff-appellant in accordance with 1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Consolidation Act’ 2Section 10(B) of the Consolidation Act applied for the cor- rection of revenue/consolidation records. The Consolidation Officer, Bathnaha upon following the due process of law vide its order dated 12.11.1979, directed for the correction of the record-of-rights. The name of the plaintiff-appellant was directed to be recorded in respect of 0.32 decimal area of land of R.S.P. No.821. The aforesaid order was duly im- plemented and the name of the plaintiff-appellant was entered into the record-of-rights. The aforesaid order is final and conclusive. It was not challenged by any party, not even by the State of Bihar in any higher forum.

--- JUDGMENT 287 ---
6. Subsequently, the State Authorities started claiming the en- tire land of 4 acre 58 decimal of C.S.P. No.332 as jalkar (pond land) which included the suit land also and thus al- legedly started interfering in the possession of the plaintiff- appellant. The plaintiff-appellant having no other option after service of notice dated 09.09.2004 as contemplated by Section 80 of Code of Civil Procedure, instituted the Suit No.103/2004 ‘Ram Balak Singh, s/o late Makhan Singh vs. 3State of Bihar and Anr.’ for declaring his title over the suit land as described in Schedule-A to the plaint and to confirm his possession over it. 7. The aforesaid suit was instituted on the allegations as nar- rated above that the suit land belonged to Rambati Kuwer, the ex-landlord, who settled it in favour of Makhan Singh in 1341 fasli. The plaintiff-appellant is the adopted son of the said Makhan Singh and as such succeeded to the said land. During the consolidation proceedings on petitions/objec- tions under Section 10(B) of the Consolidation Act, the Con- solidation Officer vide judgment and order dated 12.11.1979 ruled in favour of the plaintiff-appellant and directed his name to be recorded in the record-of-rights which order at- tained finality and has been implemented. Therefore, the State has no right, title or jurisdiction over the suit land which is in possession of the plaintiff-appellant. 8. The summons of the suit were received by the officers of the State but on their behalf no written statement was filed to controvert the plaint allegations despite several opportunit- 4ies. Lastly on 04.02.2006, the right of the State to file writ- ten statement was closed and the suit was fixed for hearing under Order VIII Rule X of Code of Civil Procedure. Since the plaint allegations were not controverted, no issue actu- ally arose between the parties for determination, nonethe- less, the trial court after formulating the point of determina- tion i.e. whether the plaintiff-appellant has been able to es- tablish his case over the suit land by any cogent and reli- able evidence proceeded to decide the suit on merits. The suit was decreed but the decree, as stated earlier, was re- versed by the first appellate court and its decision was up- held by the High Court. 9. The plaintiff-appellant has now come up before this Court by filing Special Leave Petition, which on leave being gran- ted has been registered as Civil Appeal. We have heard Ms. Nandadevi Deka, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. Suyash Vyash, learned counsel for the respondents. 10. The primary argument advanced on behalf of the plaintiff- appellant is that he or his predecessor-in-interest is in pos- 5session of the suit land ever since it was settled in favour of Makhan Singh by the ex-landlord Rambati Kuwer. During the consolidation proceedings, the rights of the plaintiff-ap- pellant over the said land were accepted and vide order dated 12.11.1979, his name was directed to be recorded in the record-of-rights. In this way, the right and title of the plaintiff-appellant over the suit land stood crystalized. Therefore, the State of Bihar cannot in any way claim the said land and disturb his possession without following any procedure of law and payment of compensation. The appel- late courts below have manifestly erred in law in reversing the decree of the court of first instance as the judgment and order of the Consolidation Officer is final and conclusive and cannot be overruled or brushed aside to record any findings contrary to it, more particularly when the plaintiff- appellant has adduced sufficient evidence to establish his right and possession over the suit land. 11. Learned Counsel for the State of Bihar set up the defence that the entire land of C.S.P. No. 332 is the pond land and it 6cannot be settled in favour of the plaintiff-appellant. He does not have any possession over the same. Secondly, in view of the bar imposed by Section 37 of the Consolidation Act, the civil suit as filed by the plaintiff-appellant itself was not maintainable and therefore the appellate courts below have not erred in reversing the order of the trial court and dismissing the suit. 12. On the submissions advanced by the parties and under the facts and circumstances of the case as narrated above, the moot question which arises for our consideration is: whether in view of the bar imposed under Section 37 of the Consolidation Act, the order of the Consolidation Authority confirming the title of the plaintiff-appellant over the suit land and directing for recording his name in the record of rights under Section 10(B) of Consolidation Act, is liable to be reversed or ignored by the Civil Court. 13. A bare reading of the provisions of the Consolidation Act would reveal that upon declaration of the State Government of its intention to bring about a scheme of Consolidation in 7the village(s) and till the close of the consolidation opera- tion, the duty of preparing and maintaining the record of rights and the village maps of each village shall be per- formed by the Director of Consolidation and no suit or legal proceeding in respect of any land in such area(s) shall be entertained by any court. The Consolidation Act even pro- hibits the transfer by any person of land falling within the notified area without the previous sanction of the Consolid- ation Officer during the consolidation operation. It further provides that no question in respect of any entry made in the map or register prepared in relation to the consolidation area, which might or ought to have been raised before the consolidation authorities shall be permitted to be raised or heard at any subsequent stage of the consolidation proceed- ing. The Consolidation Act specifically provides that all mat- ters relating to changes and transfers affecting any rights or interests recorded in the register of land may be raised be- fore the Consolidation Officer within the time prescribed 8and the disputes in this regard once decided cannot be re- opened on the publication of the register. 14. Section 37 of the Consolidation Act bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts and it reads as under: “No Civil Court shall entertain any suit or application to vary or set aside any decision or order given or passed under this Act with respect to any other matter for which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under this Act.” 15. In short, the scheme of the Consolidation Act provides that all rights in the land under consolidation, if any, would be determined by the consolidation authorities and the public- ation of the register of rights thereunder would be final and conclusive and it cannot be disputed at any subsequent stage. The aforesaid adjudication of the rights over the land under consolidation has not been specifically subjected to the rights of parties, if any, determined by the Civil Court. It is to be noted that the Legislature in its wisdom has provided for a separate forum to deal with any matter for which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken un- 9der the Consolidation Act in the course of consolidation and bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court. 16. Under the scheme of the Consolidation Act, the consolida- tion authorities are fully competent to deal with the issue of title over the land under consolidation except under certain contingencies. Thus, the consolidation authorities have the powers of the Civil Court to decide the question of the title subject to the judicial review by the High Court under Art- icles 32, 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India. In other words, the consolidation authorities have the status of the deemed courts and have the powers akin to the Civil Courts to decide the rights and title of the parties over the land un- der consolidation and, at the same time, oust the jurisdic- tion of the Civil Court. 17. We are conscious of the fact that revenue entries are not documents of title and do not ordinarily confer or extinguish title in the land but, nonetheless, where the revenue au- thorities or the consolidation authorities are competent to determine the rights of the parties by exercising powers 10akin to the Civil Courts, any order or entry made by such authorities which attains finality has to be respected and given effect to. 18.

--- JUDGMENT 288 ---
821 situate in village Kishanpur, Distt. Sitamarhi, Bihar, was settled by the ex-landlord Ram- bati Kuwer in favour of Makhan Singh through patta (lease deed), the execution of which is not in dispute. The said Makhan Singh adopted the plaintiff-appellant vide deed dated 27.05.1957 (Exh-2). The order of the Chakbandi Of- ficer, Bathnaha (Exh -7) demonstrates that the plaintiff-ap- pellant had filed Case No.11 of 1979 under Section 10(B) of the Consolidation Act for the correction of the entry in re- spect of the suit land and that the Consolidation Officer vide order dated 12.11.1979 on the basis of the documents and the oral evidence adduced before him ruled that plaintiff-appellant is the adopted son of Makhan Singh; that he is in possession of the suit land and no villager or any other party has any objection if the same is recorded in his 11name. The Consolidation Officer further referring to the patta by which the said land was settled in favour of Makhan Singh and the adoption deed directed the name of the plaintiff-appellant to be recorded in the record of rights. 19. It is an admitted fact that after the closure of the consolida- tion proceedings when the possession of the plaintiff-appel- lant came to be interfered with by the State, he was forced to file a suit for declaration of his rights over the said land irrespective of the finality of the order of the Consolidation Officer. The cause of action in the said suit was a fresh cause of action arising after the closure of consolidation proceedings. In the said suit no contest was made by the State of U.P., neither any written statement was filed nor any evidence was adduced on its behalf. The court of first instance on the basis of the evidence both documentary and oral adduced by the plaintiff-appellant decreed the suit and held him to be the owner in possession of the suit land. 20. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the rights of the parties over the suit land stood crystalised with the 12passing of the order dated 12.11.1979 by the Consolidation Officer which became final and conclusive. The State of Bi- har never challenged the said order. It is not its case that the aforesaid order has been obtained by concealment of facts or by playing fraud upon the consolidation authorities. The State of Bihar at no point of time came forward to claim the right, title or interest of disputed land before any forum either the consolidation authorities or the Civil Court, rather forced the plaintiff-appellant to institute the civil suit despite recognition of his rights by the consolidation au- thorities. 21. In view of the above, when the rights of the plaintiff-appel- lant have been determined and recognised by the consolida- tion authorities, the order of the Consolidation Officer to that effect in favour of the plaintiff-appellant could not have been ignored by the Civil Court. The jurisdiction of the Civil Court in respect of the rights determined by the Consolida- tion Officer stands impliedly excluded by the very scheme of the Consolidation Act. The appellate courts below completely 13fell in error in holding otherwise discarding the order of the Consolidation Officer which was sacrosanct as to the rights in respect to the suit land. 22. Insofar as, the bar of Civil Court imposed by Section 37 of the Consolidation Act is concerned, a plain reading of the said provision would reveal that the Civil Court is prohib- ited from entertaining any suit to vary or set aside any de- cision or order of the Consolidation Court passed under the Act in respect of the matter for which the proceedings could have or ought to have been taken under the Consolidation Act. 23. In the instant case, the plaintiff-appellant has not instituted any suit either to vary or set aside any decision or order passed by the Consolidation Court under the Consolidation Act. The plaintiff-appellant had simply filed a suit for recog- nising the rights which have been conferred upon him by the Consolidation Court and has not filed a suit challenging any order passed by the Consolidation Court under the Act. Therefore, the bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court imposed by 14Section 37 is not applicable to the present suit which is a simpliciter for declaration of his rights over the suit land on the basis of the order of the Consolidation Court. 24. In view of the facts and circumstances, even though there was no necessity on the part of the plaintiff-appellant to have instituted any civil suit for declaration of his rights over the suit land inasmuch as his rights over the same stood determined by the Consolidation Court vide order dated 12.11.1979, nonetheless, a suit as filed by him is not barred by Section 37 of the Consolidation Act, as it does not propose to challenge any order passed by the Consolidation Court under the Consolidation Act. 25. Thus, our answer to the question framed in paragraph 12 above is that a civil suit for declaration of rights in respect of land where the Consolidation Court has already passed an order recognizing the rights of one of the parties is not barred by Section 37 of the Consolidation Act and that the Civil Court is not competent to either ignore or reverse the 15order passed by the Consolidation Officer once it has at- tained finality. 26. In the above facts and circumstances, the impugned judg- ment and orders of the appellate courts dated 20.10.2011 and 14.07.2008 are set aside and that of the court of the first instance dated 04.07.2006 is restored. Consequently, the suit of the plaintiff-appellant stands decreed.

--- JUDGMENT 289 ---
2. The concerns which have arisen during the course of hearing the present appeals are of particular significance for meeting the ends of criminal justice, and relate to the nature of chargesheets filed in some jurisdictions by the state/police. For the sake of convenience, we would divide the judgment into two parts. The first part relates to the legal issue, that is, the contents of the chargesheet in terms of Section 173(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 1 of 3819731. The second part deals with the factual aspects of each of the cases, and our decision. PART I 3. The issue in the first part relates to chargesheets being filed without stating sufficient details of the facts constituting the offense or putting the relevant evidence on record. In some states, the chargesheets merely carry a reproduction of the details mentioned by the complainant in the First Information Report2, and then proceed to state whether an offence is made out, or not made out, without any elucidation on the evidence and material relied upon. On this issue, the recent judgment of this Court in Dablu Kujur v. State of Jharkhand3 aptly crystallises the legal position in the following words: “17. Ergo, having regard to the provisions contained in Section 173 it is hereby directed that the Report of police officer on the completion of investigation shall contain the following:— (i) A report in the form prescribed by the State Government stating- (a) the names of the parties; (b) the nature of the information; (c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case; (d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom; (e) whether the accused has been arrested; (f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties; (g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170. (h) Whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates to an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or section 376E of the Penal Code, 1860” 1 “Code”, for short. 2 “FIR”, for short.

--- JUDGMENT 290 ---
3 2024 SCC Online SC 269. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 2 of 38(ii) If upon the completion of investigation, there is no sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, the Police officer in charge shall clearly state in the Report about the compliance of Section 169 Cr. P.C. (iii) When the report in respect of a case to which Section 170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report, all the documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation; and the statements recorded under Section 161 of all the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. (iv) In case of further investigation, the Police officer in charge shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed and shall also comply with the details mentioned in the above sub para (i) to (iii).” 4. The decision in Dablu Kujur (supra) refers to Section 157 of the Code which inter alia states that, if on information received or otherwise, an officer of the police station has reason to suspect commission of an offence which he is empowered under Section 156 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to the Magistrate empowered to take cognisance of the offence. Further, he shall proceed in person or depute any of his subordinate officers to proceed to the spot to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and if necessary, to take measures for discovery and arrest the offender. Such report is in the nature of a preliminary report. As per Section 169 of the Code, if it appears to the officer in-charge of the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify forwarding the accused to the Magistrate, then the officer shall release the person if he is in custody on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, with a direction to Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 3 of 38such person to appear if and when so required, before the Magistrate empowered to take cognisance of the offence from the police report.4 5. Section 170 of the Code deals with the cases where it appears to the officer that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground to proceed. In such an event he is required to submit a police report or chargesheet under Section 173(2) of the Code. Elucidating on Section 173(2) of the Code in Dablu Kujur (supra), this Court observed: “12. We are more concerned with Section 173(2) as we have found that the investigating officers while submitting the chargesheet/Police Report do not comply with the requirements of the said provision. Though it is true that the form of the report to be submitted under Section 173(2) has to be prescribed by the State Government and each State Government has its own Police Manual to be followed by the police officers while discharging their duty, the mandatory requirements required to be complied with by such officers in the Police Report/Chargesheet are laid down in Section 173, more particularly sub-section (2) thereof. 13. It may be noted that though there are various reports required to be submitted by the police in charge of the police station before, during and after the investigation as contemplated in Chapter XII of Cr. P.C., it is only the report forwarded by the police officer to the Magistrate under sub- section (2) of Section 173 Cr. P.C. that can form the basis for the competent court for taking cognizance thereupon. A chargesheet is nothing but a final report of the police officer under Section 173(2) of Cr. P.C. It is an opinion or intimation of the investigating officer to the concerned court that on the material collected during the course of investigation, an offence appears to have been committed by the particular person or persons, or that no offence appears to have been committed. 4 We clarify and respectfully agree with the view expressed by this Court in Siddharth v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another, (2022) 1 SCC 676, which has interpreted Section 170 of the Code. The word ‘custody’ used in the said Section does not contemplate either police or judicial custody, for otherwise the Section would lead to unpalatable and incongruous consequences. It is observed that in normal and ordinary course, the police should avoid arresting a person and sending him to jail, if it is possible for the police to complete the investigation without his arrest and if every kind of cooperation is provided by the accused to the investigating officer in completing the investigation. The word ‘custody’ in Section 170 has to be interpreted liberally and merely connotes presentation of the accused by the investigating officer. This is because personally liberty is an important aspect of the constitutional mandate. Existence of the power of arrest, and justification for exercise thereof are two different aspects. Section 170 of the Code does not impose an obligation on the officer in-charge to arrest each and every accused before or at the time of filing of the chargesheet. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 291 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 4 of 38xx xx xx 15. The issues with regard to the compliance of Section 173(2) Cr. P.C., may also arise, when the investigating officer submits Police Report only qua some of the persons-accused named in the FIR, keeping open the investigation qua the other persons-accused, or when all the documents as required under Section 173(5) are not submitted. In such a situation, the question that is often posed before the court is whether such a Police Report could be said to have been submitted in compliance with sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr. P.C. In this regard, it may be noted that in Satya Narain Musadi v. State of Bihar, this Court has observed that statutory requirement of the report under Section 173(2) would be complied with if various details prescribed therein are included in the report. The report is complete if it is accompanied with all the documents and statements of witnesses as required by Section 175(5)…” 6. We would like to elaborate on certain aspects, as submission of the chargesheet is for taking cognisance and summoning of the accused by the Magistrate, which stages are of considerable importance and significance. 7.

--- JUDGMENT 292 ---
Section 173 of the Code reads: “173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation.— (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay. (1A) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be completed within two months from the date on which the information was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station. (2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government, stating— (a) the names of the parties; (b) the nature of the information; (c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case; (d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom; Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 5 of 38(e) whether the accused has been arrested; (f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties; (g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170. (h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates to an offence under [sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). (ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information relating to the commission of the offence was first given. (3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the report shall, in any case in which the State Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation. (4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused has been released on his bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit. (5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report— (a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation; (b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. (6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request. (7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused copies of all or any of the documents referred to in sub-section (5). Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 293 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 6 of 38(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (2)”. 8. Sub-section (2) to Section 173 makes a considered departure from sub- Section (1) to Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18985. Sub- section (1)(a) to Section 173 of the 1898 Code had stipulated that as soon as the investigation is completed, the officer in-charge of the police station shall forward to the Magistrate, a report in the form prescribed by the local government, sending forth the names of the parties, nature of the information and the names of the people who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case and state whether the accused person has been forwarded in custody or released on a bond. 9. We have referred to Section 173 of the 1898 Code, in view of reliance placed during the course of hearing on the decision of this Court in Tara Singh v. State6 and R.K.

--- JUDGMENT 294 ---
In R.K. Dalmia (supra), again a reference was made to Section 173(1) of the 1898 Code and that the chargesheet must contain name of the parties, nature of the information and the names of persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case. These observations were made in the context of the submission made on behalf of the accused that there was a change in the stand of the prosecution, which contention was rejected on several grounds, as mentioned in paragraphs 325 and 326 of the footnoted citation. 12. It is, therefore, apparent from the language of the legislation, that under the Code, that is, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the requirement and the manner of providing details in the chargesheet, stand verified. 13. The question of the required details being complete must be understood in a way which gives effect to the true intent of the chargesheet under Section 173(2) of the Code. The requirement of “further evidence” or a “supplementary chargesheet” as referred to under Section 173(8) of the Code, is to make additions to a complete chargesheet,8 and not to make up or reparate for a chargesheet which does not fulfil requirements of Section 173(2) of the Code. The chargesheet is complete when it refers to material and evidence sufficient 8 State Through Central Bureau of Investigation v. Hemendhra Reddy & Anr., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 515.

--- JUDGMENT 295 ---
Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 8 of 38to take cognizance and for the trial. The nature and standard of evidence to be elucidated in a chargesheet should prima facie show that an offence is established if the material and evidence is proven. The chargesheet is complete where a case is not exclusively dependent on further evidence. The trial can proceed on the basis of evidence and material placed on record with the chargesheet. This standard is not overly technical or fool-proof, but a pragmatic balance to protect the innocent from harassment due to delay as well as prolonged incarceration, and yet not curtail the right of the prosecution to forward further evidence in support of the charges9. 14. In the context of the present issue, it would be apt to refer to Section 190 and Section 204 of the Code, along with the provisions relating to contents of charge, namely, Sections 211 to 213 and Section 218 of the Code, which read as under: “190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence— (a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence; (b) upon a police report of such facts; (c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been committed. (2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try. xx xx xx 204. Issue of process.—(1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be— 9 See also, para 21 below on the power of the police to investigate under Section 173(8) of the Code. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 296 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 9 of 38(a) a summons-case, he shall issue his summons for the attendance of the accused, or (b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction. (2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1) until a list of the prosecution witnesses has been filed. (3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint. (4) When by any law for the time being in force any process- fees or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint. (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of Section 87. xx xx xx 211. Contents of charge.—(1) Every charge under this Code shall state the offence with which the accused is charged. (2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be described in the charge by that name only. (3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged. (4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the charge. (5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal condition required by law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case. (6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 297 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 10 of 38(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by reason of such previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment which the Court may think fit to award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time before sentence is passed. 212. Particulars as to time, place and person.—(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged. (2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates between which the offence is alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of Section 219: Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year. 213. When manner of committing offence must be stated.—When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in Sections 211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose. xx xx xx 218. Separate charges for distinct offences.—(1) For every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately: Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and the Magistrate is of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrate may try together all or any number of the charges framed against such person. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 298 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 11 of 38(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of Sections 219, 220, 221 and 223. 15. On the submission of the police report, Dablu Kujur (supra) refers to an earlier decision of this Court in Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police and Another10, and discusses the power and the role of the Magistrate when he receives the police report and the options available to him, in the following words: “14. When such a Police Report concludes that an offence appears to have been committed by a particular person or persons, the Magistrate has three options: (i) he may accept the report and take cognizance of the offence and issue process, (ii) he may direct further investigation under sub- section (3) of Section 156 and require the police to make a further report, or (iii) he may disagree with the report and discharge the accused or drop the proceedings. If such Police Report concludes that no offence appears to have been committed, the Magistrate again has three options: (i) he may accept the report and drop the proceedings, or (ii) he may disagree with the report and taking the view that there is sufficient ground for proceeding further, take cognizance of the offence and issue process, or (iii) he may direct further investigation to be made by the police under sub-section (3) of Section 156.” It is in this context that the provisions of Sections 190 and 204 of the Code become important. Clause (a) of Section 190 states that the Magistrate can take cognisance of an offence on receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence. Clause (b) relates to a situation where the Magistrate receives a police report carrying such facts, i.e., facts which constitute such offence. In Minu Kumari and Another v. State of Bihar and Others11 this Court referred to the options available to the Magistrate on how to proceed in terms of Section 190(1)(b) of the Code, and held: “11...The position is, therefore, now well settled that upon receipt of a police report under Section 173(2) a Magistrate is entitled to take cognizance of an offence under Section 10 (1985) 2 SCC 537. 11 (2006) 4 SCC 359.

--- JUDGMENT 299 ---
Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 12 of 38190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the effect that no case is made out against the accused. The Magistrate can take into account the statements of the witnesses examined by the police during the investigation and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order the issue of process to the accused. Section 190(1)(b) does not lay down that a Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence only if the investigating officer gives an opinion that the investigation has made out a case against the accused. The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by the investigating officer and independently apply his mind to the facts emerging from the investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit, exercise his powers under Section 190(1)(b) and direct the issue of process to the accused. The Magistrate is not bound in such a situation to follow the procedure laid down in Sections 200 and 202 of the Code for taking cognizance of a case under Section 190(1)(a) though it is open to him to act under Section 200 or Section 202 also. (See India Carat (P) Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 300 ---
v. State of Karnataka [(1989) 2 SCC 132 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 306 : AIR 1989 SC 885] .) 12. The informant is not prejudicially affected when the Magistrate decides to take cognizance and to proceed with the case. But where the Magistrate decides that sufficient ground does not subsist for proceeding further and drops the proceeding or takes the view that there is material for proceeding against some and there are insufficient grounds in respect of others, the informant would certainly be prejudiced as the first information report lodged becomes wholly or partially ineffective. This Court in Bhagwant Singh v. Commr. of Police held that where the Magistrate decides not to take cognizance and to drop the proceeding or takes a view that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against some of the persons mentioned in the first information report, notice to the informant and grant of opportunity of being heard in the matter becomes mandatory. As indicated above, there is no provision in the Code for issue of a notice in that regard. 13. We may add here that the expressions “charge-sheet” or “final report” are not used in the Code, but it is understood in Police Manuals of several States containing the rules and the regulations to be a report by the police filed under Section 170 of the Code, described as a “charge-sheet”. In case of reports sent under Section 169 i.e. where there is no sufficiency of evidence to justify forwarding of a case to a Magistrate, it is termed variously i.e. referred charge, final report or summary. Section 173 in terms does not refer to any notice to be given to raise any protest to the report submitted by the police. Though the notice issued under some of the Police Manuals states it to be a notice under Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 13 of 38Section 173 of the Code, there is nothing in Section 173 specifically providing for such a notice.” 16. This Court in Bhushan Kumar and Another v. State (NCT of Delhi) and Another12 while referring to Sections 190 and 204 of the Code has observed that the expression “cognisance” in Section 190 merely means “becoming aware of”, and when used with reference to a court or a judge it connotes “to take notice of judicially”. It indicates the juncture at which the court or Magistrate takes judicial notice of the offence with a view to initiate proceedings in respect of such an offence. This is different from initiation of proceedings. Rather, it is a condition precedent to the initiation of proceedings by a Magistrate or judge. At this stage, the Magistrate has to keep in mind the averments in the complaint or the police report, and has to evaluate whether there is sufficient ground for initiation of proceedings. This is not the same as the consideration of sufficient grounds for conviction, as whether evidence is sufficient for supporting the conviction or not, can be determined only at the stage of trial, and not at the stage of cognisance. This aspect is important and will be subsequently referred to when we examine the decision of this Court in K. Veeraswami v. Union of India and Others13, and the observations therein which have been referred to on several occasions in other judgments. 17. Section 204 of the Code does not mandate the Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for issue of summons and this is not a prerequisite for deciding the validity of the summons. Nevertheless, the requirement of the Code is that the summons is issued when it appears to the Magistrate that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. Summons is issued to the person against whom the legal proceedings have commenced. Wilful disobedience is 12 (2012) 5 SCC 424. 13 (1991) 3 SCC 655. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 14 of 38liable to be punished under Section 174 of the Indian Penal Code, 186014. As a sequitur, keeping in mind both the language of Section 204 of the Code and the penal consequences, the Magistrate is mandated to form an opinion as to whether there exists sufficient ground for summons to be issued. While deciding whether summons is to be issued to a person, the Magistrate can take into consideration any prima facie improbabilities arising in the case. The parameters on which a summoning order can be interfered with are well settled by the decision of this court in Bhushan Kumar (supra). The Magistrate in terms of Section 204 of the Code is required to exercise his judicial discretion with a degree of caution, even when he is not required to record reasons, on whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding. Proceedings initiated by a criminal court are generally not interfered with by High Courts, unless necessary to secure the ends of justice.15 18. The decision in Bhushan Kumar (supra) also refers to Section 251 of the Code, which is a stage post appearance of the accused, and observes: “20. It is inherent in Section 251 of the Code that when an accused appears before the trial court pursuant to summons issued under Section 204 of the Code in a summons trial case, it is the bounden duty of the trial court to carefully go through the allegations made in the charge-sheet or complaint and consider the evidence to come to a conclusion whether or not, commission of any offence is disclosed and if the answer is in the affirmative, the Magistrate shall explain the substance of the accusation to the accused and ask him whether he pleads guilty otherwise, he is bound to discharge the accused as per Section 239 of the Code.” 19. Sections 211 to 213 and Section 218 of the Code deal with the contents of the charge. The object and purpose of these provisions is to bring the nature of 14 “IPC”, for short. 15 R.P.

--- JUDGMENT 301 ---
Kapur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866; State of Haryana and Others v. Bhajan Lal and Others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 15 of 38allegations against the accused to his notice. These allegations have to be proved and established by leading evidence. The accused should not be taken by surprise or be unbeknownst so as to cause prejudice to him. The provisions of the Code also prescribe how to interpret the words used in the charge in terms of Section 214 of the Code, the effect of defects in the charge in terms of Section 215 of the Code, the power of the court to alter the charge and recall of the witnesses when a charge is altered in terms of Sections 216 and 217 of the Code. 20. There is an inherent connect between the chargesheet submitted under Section 173(2) of the Code, cognisance which is taken under Section 190 of the Code, issue of process and summoning of the accused under Section 204 of the Code, and thereupon issue of notice under Section 251 of the Code, or the charge in terms of Chapter XVII of the Code. The details set out in the chargesheet have a substantial impact on the efficacy of procedure at the subsequent stages. The chargesheet is integral to the process of taking cognisance, the issue of notice and framing of charge, being the only investigative document and evidence available to the court till that stage. Substantiated reasons and grounds for an offence being made in the chargesheet are a key resource for a Magistrate to evaluate whether there are sufficient grounds for taking cognisance, initiating proceedings, and then issuing notice, framing charges etc. 21. These provisions, however, have to be read along with the power of the police to investigate under sub-section (8) to Section 173 of the Code even when they have submitted a report under sub-section (2) to Section 173 of the Code. The police also has the power to produce additional documents and evidence, as has been held by this Court in Parkash Singh Badal and Another v. State of Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 302 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 16 of 38Punjab and Others16; Narendra Kumar Amin v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Others17; and Central Bureau of Investigation v. R.S. Pai and Another18. 22. Recently a three Judge Bench of this Court in Zakia Ahsan Jafri v. State of Gujarat and Another19, has observed: “11. This Court in Dayal Singh noted that the investigating officer is obliged to act as per the Police Manual and known canons of practice while being diligent, truthful and fair in his/her approach and investigation. It has been noted in the reported decision that an investigating officer is completely responsible and answerable for the manner and methodology adopted in completing his investigation. Concededly, upon completion of investigation, the investigating officer is obliged to submit report setting out prescribed details, to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence referred to therein, without unnecessary delay. The report so presented is the conclusion reached by the investigating officer on the basis of materials collected during investigation. The duty of the investigating officer is to collate every relevant information/material during the investigation, which he must believe to be the actual course of events and the true facts unraveling the commission of the alleged crime and the person involved in committing the same. He is expected to examine the materials from all angles. In the event, there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground that an offence appears to have been committed and the person committing such offence has been identified, the investigating officer is obliged to record his opinion in that regard, as required by Section 173(2)(i)(d) of the Code. In other words, if the investigating officer intends to send the accused for trial, he is obliged to form a firm opinion not only about the commission of offence, but also about the involvement of such person in the commission of crime. 12. Such opinion is the culmination of the analysis of the materials collected during the investigation - that there is “strong suspicion” against the accused, which eventually will lead the concerned Court to think that there is a ground for “presuming” that the accused “has” committed the alleged offence; and not a case of mere suspicion. For being a case of strong suspicion, there must exist sufficient materials to 16 (2007) 1 SCC 1. 17 (2015) 3 SCC 417. 18 (2002) 5 SCC 82. 19 (2022) 6 SCR 1: 2022 INSC 653. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 17 of 38corroborate the facts and circumstances of the case; and be of such weight that it would facilitate the Court concerned to take cognizance of the crime and eventually lead it to think (form opinion) that there is ground “for presuming that the accused has committed an offence”, as alleged – so as to frame a charge against him in terms of Section 228(1) or 246(1) of the Code, as the case may be. For taking cognizance of the crime or to frame charges against the accused, the Court must analyze the report filed by the investigating officer and all the materials appended thereto and then form an independent prima facie opinion as to whether there is ground for “presuming” that the accused “has” committed an offence, as alleged. (It is not, “may” have or “likely” to have committed an offence, but a ground for presuming that he has committed an offence). The Magistrate in the process may have to give due weightage to the opinion of the investigating officer. If such is to be the eventual outcome of the final report presented by the investigating officer, then there is nothing wrong if he applies the same standard to form an opinion about the materials collected during the investigation and articulate it in the report submitted under Section 173 of the Code. It may be useful to refer to the decisions adverted to in Afroz Mohd. Hasanfata including in the case of Ramesh Singh and I.K. Nangia.

--- JUDGMENT 303 ---
xx xx xx 63. Needless to underscore that every information coming to the investigating agency must be regarded as relevant. However, the investigating agency is expected to make enquiries regarding the authenticity of such information and after doing so must collect corroborative evidence in support thereof. In absence of corroborative evidence, it would be merely a case of suspicion and not pass the muster of grave suspicion, which is the pre-requisite for sending the suspect for trial. This is the mandate in Section 173(2)(i)(d) of the Code, which postulates that the investigating officer in his report must indicate whether any offence appears to have been committed and if so, by whom. The opinion of the investigating officer formed on the basis of materials collected during the investigation/enquiry must be given due weightage. That would only be the threshold, to facilitate the concerned Court to take cognizance of the crime and then frame charge if it is of the opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under Chapter XIX of the Code.” Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 18 of 3823. In K. Veeraswami (supra), K. Jagannatha Shetty, J. pronounced the judgment for himself and M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as His Lordship then was) on the question of contents of the chargesheet and observed: “75. In the view that we have taken as to the nature of the offence created under clause (e), it may not be necessary to examine the contention relating to ingredient of the offence. But since the legality of the charge-sheet has been impeached, we will deal with that contention also. Counsel laid great emphasis on the expression “for which he cannot satisfactorily account” used in clause (e) of Section 5(1) of the Act. He argued that that term means that the public servant is entitled to an opportunity before the Investigating Officer to explain the alleged disproportionality between assets and the known sources of income. The Investigating Officer is required to consider his explanation and the charge-sheet filed by him must contain such averment. The failure to mention that requirement would vitiate the charge- sheet and renders it invalid. This submission, if we may say so, completely overlooks the powers of the Investigating Officer. The Investigating Officer is only required to collect material to find out whether the offence alleged appears to have been committed. In the course of the investigation, he may examine the accused. He may seek his clarification and if necessary he may cross check with him about his known sources of income and assets possessed by him. Indeed, fair investigation requires as rightly stated by Mr A.D. Giri, learned Solicitor General, that the accused should not be kept in darkness. He should be taken into confidence if he is willing to cooperate. But to state that after collection of all material the Investigating Officer must give an opportunity to the accused and call upon him to account for the excess of the assets over the known sources of income and then decide whether the accounting is satisfactory or not, would be elevating the Investigating Officer to the position of an enquiry officer or a judge. The Investigating Officer is not holding an enquiry against the conduct of the public servant or determining the disputed issues regarding the disproportionality between the assets and the income of the accused. He just collects material from all sides and prepares a report which he files in the court as charge- sheet.” The latter portion of the aforesaid paragraph, referring to the details of the offence and the requirement for them to be proved in order to bring home the guilt of the accused at the later stage (the stage of trial) by adducing acceptable evidence, has to be understood in the context that the chargesheet Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 19 of 38need not elaborately evaluate the evidence, as the process of evaluation is a matter of trial. This does not mean that the chargesheet should not disclose or refer to the facts as to meet the requirements of Section 173(2) of the Code, and the mandate of the State rules. Further, the earlier portion of the same paragraph, while referring to the opinion of the investigating officer, does so to demonstrate the significance of the opinion of the investigating officer at this stage. However, this does not preclude the Magistrate from exercising her powers in adopting an approach independent from such opinion, as has been held by this Court in Bhagwant Singh (supra) and Minu Kumari (supra). 24. It is the police report which would enable the Magistrate to decide a course of action from the options available to him. The details of the offence and investigation are not supposed to be a comprehensive thesis of the prosecution case, but at the same time, must reflect a thorough investigation into the alleged offence. It is on the basis of this record that the court can take effective cognisance of the offence and proceed to issue process in terms of Section 190(1)(b) and Section 204 of the Code. In case of doubt or debate, or if no offence is made out, it is open to the Magistrate to exercise other options which are available to him. 25. In support of our reasoning, we would refer to the very next paragraph in the judgment of Shetty, J. in K.

--- JUDGMENT 304 ---
Veeraswami (supra) which reads as under: “76. The charge-sheet is nothing but a final report of police officer under Section 173(2) of the CrPC. The Section 173(2) provides that on completion of the investigation the police officer investigating into a cognizable offence shall submit a report. The report must be in the form prescribed by the State Government and stating therein (a) the names of the parties; (b) the nature of the information; (c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case; (d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom (e) whether the accused has been arrested; (f) whether he had been Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 20 of 38released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties; and (g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under Section 170. As observed by this Court in Satya Narain Musadi v. State of Bihar that the statutory requirement of the report under Section 173(2) would be complied with if the various details prescribed therein are included in the report. This report is an intimation to the magistrate that upon investigation into a cognizable offence the Investigating Officer has been able to procure sufficient evidence for the court to inquire into the offence and the necessary information is being sent to the court. In fact, the report under Section 173(2) purports to be an opinion of the Investigating Officer that as far as he is concerned he has been able to procure sufficient material for the trial of the accused by the court. The report is complete if it is accompanied with all the documents and statements of witnesses as required by Section 175(5). Nothing more need be stated in the report of the Investigating Officer. It is also not necessary that all the details of the offence must be stated. The details of the offence are required to be proved to bring home the guilt to the accused at a later stage i.e. in the course of the trial of the case by adducing acceptable evidence. This paragraph examines the contents of the chargesheet and on elaboration of the same holds that it is in accordance with the terms of Section 173(2) of the Code as well as the provisions of the penal enactment. In furtherance of this, reference is made to Satya Narain Musadi and Others v. State of Bihar20, in stating that the chargesheet should comply with the statutory requirements, and the various details prescribed therein should be included in the report. 26. The object and purpose of the police investigation is manyfold. It includes the need to ensure transparent and free investigation to ascertain the facts, examine whether or not an offence is committed, identify the offender if an offence is committed, and to lay before the court the evidence which has been collected, the truth and correctness of which is thereupon decided by the court. 20 (1980) 3 SCC 152.

--- JUDGMENT 305 ---
Rishbud and Inder Singh v. State of Delhi21, this Court notes that the process of investigation generally consists of: 1) proceeding to the concerned spot, 2) ascertainment of facts and circumstances, 3) discovery and arrest, 4) collection of evidence which includes examination of various persons, search of places and seizure of things, and 5) formation of an opinion on whether an offence is made out, and filing the chargesheet accordingly. The formation of opinion is therefore the culmination of several stages that an investigation goes through. This Court in its decision in Abhinandan Jha and Others v. Dinesh Mishra22 states that the submission of the chargesheet or the final report is dependent on the nature of opinion formed, which is the final step in the investigation. 28. The final report has to be prepared with these aspects in mind and should show with sufficient particularity and clarity, the contravention of the law which is alleged. When the report complies with the said requirements, the court concerned should apply its mind whether or not to take cognisance and also proceed by issuing summons to the accused. While doing so, the court will take into account the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the Code and the documents placed on record by the investigating officer. 29. In case of any doubts or ambiguity arising in ascertaining the facts and evidence, the Magistrate can, before taking cognisance, call upon the investigating officer to clarify and give better particulars, order further investigation, or even record statements in terms of Section 202 of the Code. 21 (1954) 2 SCC 934.

--- JUDGMENT 306 ---
22 AIR 1968 SC 117. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 22 of 3830. Our attention has been drawn to the format prescribed for the State of Uttar Pradesh, which by column 16 requires the investigating officer to state brief facts of the case. In addition, the State of Uttar Pradesh has issued a circular dated 19.09.2023, which refers to an earlier circular bearing No. 59 of 2016 dated 20.10.2016, and states that the investigation provisions contained in the Code and the police regulations with reference to Section 173 of the Code are not being consistently complied with and followed by the investigating officers and the supervising officers. The need to provide lead details of the offence in the chargesheet is mandatory as it is in accord with paragraph 122 of the police regulations. Similar directions were issued on 09.09.2022 following the direction of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad that brief narration of the material collected during investigation, which forms the opinion of the investigating officer, should be mentioned in the chargesheet. 31. Therefore, the investigating officer must make clear and complete entries of all columns in the chargesheet so that the court can clearly understand which crime has been committed by which accused and what is the material evidence available on the file. Statements under Section 161 of the Code and related documents have to be enclosed with the list of witnesses. The role played by the accused in the crime should be separately and clearly mentioned in the chargesheet, for each of the accused persons. PART II 32. As we turn to the second part of our judgment, it would be appropriate to lead our decision in each case with a brief overview of its pertinent facts: A. Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1074/2017 • The appellants have been involved in a drawn-out litigation with several parties over the ownership of Property No. 80-A, 23,072 sq. ft., forming a Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 23 of 38part of Khasra no. 1016/647 and 645, situated within Chandrawli/Shahdara, now in Abadi, at Circular Road, Shahdara, Delhi- 110032.23 • Appellant No.2 – Sharif Ahmad and Appellant No.3 – Anwar Ahmad (since deceased), purchased a part in the subject property on behalf of their partnership firm Dream Land & Co., while Appellant No.1 – Vakil Ahmad (since deceased) had done so in his individual capacity. • To avoid prolixity, we would refrain from setting out the facts of the litigation in detail. • The challenge before us relates to the First Information Report No. 108/2016 dated 23.05.2016, filed by Respondent No.2/complainant - Mohd. Iqbal, under Sections 420, 406 and 506 IPC at police station Hafizpur, Hapur, U.P. against the appellants. The FIR stated that the appellants had agreed to sell the subject property to Respondent No. 2 and had received part payment for the registry of the subject property. However, the appellants did not register the property and also failed to refund the concerned amount to Respondent No. 2. • The Police recorded the statements of Respondent No.2, and the witnesses under Section 161 of the Code. • According to these statements, the appellants had refused to refund the amount paid by Respondent No. 2 despite repeated requests to do the same. • A complaint dated 03.09.2016 was filed against Respondent No. 2 at Police Station Tis Hazari by relatives of the appellants on account of receiving threats to their life. • The appellants challenged FIR No. 108/2016 in W.P. (Cr.) No.20221/2016 before the Allahabad High Court and sought quashing of the proceedings. 23 “subject property”, for short. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 24 of 38By an order dated 15.09.2016, the High Court stayed the arrest of the appellant until filing of the chargesheet. • On 24.10.2016, a chargesheet was filed against the appellants under Sections 405 and 506 IPC. • The appellants approached the Allahabad High Court in Cr. M.A.

--- JUDGMENT 307 ---
No. 960/2017 seeking the quashing of the chargesheet and of proceedings in Case No. 410/2016. The appellants submitted that the chargesheet is vague, filed without proper investigation, and fails to make out any offence. • The Allahabad High Court dismissed the application for quashing of the chargesheet through the impugned order dated 12.01.2017. • Hence, the appellants have filed the present appeal. 33. The FIR as registered, on the question of intimidation states that on 19.03.2016 the appellants had flatly refused to refund the money and had told Respondent No. 2 that they can do whatever they want. They had threatened the entire family of the complainant. 34. The chargesheet submitted by the investigating officer in the present case, under column 16 referring to the facts of the case, reads as under: “Sir, the above said case was got registered by the complainant Shri Iqbal on 23/5/16 at this police station, the investigation of which handed over to me S.I., the investigation of which done by me S.I. and from all the investigation till now, statement of the complainant, statement of the witnesses and inspection of place of occurrence, the deal of plot measuring 2600 which is at behind Sadar Police Station was finalized by the accused persons with the complainant and his partner Surender Sharma for 4 crore, for which by not getting executed the registry of the same at the time of the complainant and after receiving a sum of Rs. 1 crore of his partner Surender Sharma as earnest money, selling of plot to Kusum Jain and D.K. Jain, by not refunding a sum of Rs. 1 crore of the complainant and his partner, grabbing by doing breach of trust, making pretexts on demanding again and again and the threat to kill, hence the offence under section 406, 506 Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 25 of 38IPC is thoroughly proved upon the accused persons Sharif Ahmed, Anwar Ahmed, Vakil Ahmed, Aadil Ahmed, the occurrence of section 420 IPC is not found, hence the challan of the accused persons, by charge sheet No. 153/16 is filled in the court, it is prayed that punishment may be given by calling the proof.” 35. A reading thereof would indicate that it refers to the complaint made by Respondent No. 2 – Iqbal on 23.05.2016 relating to the deal of a plot in respect of which part consideration was paid as earnest money. But thereafter, the appellants had sold the plot and were not refunding the earnest money and by doing so have committed breach of trust under Section 406 of the IPC. It also refers to the alleged pretexts being made by the appellants on money being demanded and a threat to kill being extended. It is also recorded that an offence under Section 506 has been proved to have been committed. At the same time, the chargesheet states that no offence under Section 420 of the IPC is found to have been committed. 36. An offence under Section 406 of the IPC requires entrustment, which carries the implication that a person handing over any property or on whose behalf the property is handed over, continues to be the owner of the said property. Further, the person handing over the property must have confidence in the person taking the property to create a fiduciary relationship between them. A normal transaction of sale or exchange of money/consideration does not amount to entrustment.24 Clearly, the charge/offence of Section 406 IPC is not even remotely made out. 37. The chargesheet states that the offence under Section 420 is not made out. The offence of cheating under Section 415 of the IPC requires dishonest 24 See Section 405 of the IPC and judgments of this Court in State of Gujarat v. Jaswantlal Nathalal AIR 1968 SC 700; Indian Oil Corpn.

--- JUDGMENT 308 ---
v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others (2006) 6 SCC 736; Central Bureau of Investigation, SPE, SIU(X), New Delhi v. Duncans Agro Industries Ltd., Calcutta (1996) 5 SCC 591. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 26 of 38inducement, delivering of a property as a result of the inducement, and damage or harm to the person so induced. The offence of cheating is established when the dishonest intention exists at the time when the contract or agreement is entered, for the essential ingredient of the offence of cheating consists of fraudulent or dishonest inducement of a person by deceiving him to deliver any property, to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he had not been deceived. As per the investigating officer, no fraudulent and dishonest inducement is made out or established at the time when the agreement was entered. 38. An offence of criminal intimidation arises when the accused intendeds to cause alarm to the victim, though it does not matter whether the victim is alarmed or not. The intention of the accused to cause alarm must be established by bringing evidence on record. The word ‘intimidate’ means to make timid or fearful, especially: to compel or deter by or as if by threats.25 The threat communicated or uttered by the person named in the chargesheet as an accused, should be uttered and communicated by the said person to threaten the victim for the purpose of influencing her mind. The word ‘threat’ refers to the intent to inflict punishment, loss or pain on the other. Injury involves doing an illegal act. 39.

--- JUDGMENT 309 ---
Merriam-Webster, 2024. 26 (2015) 7 SCC 423. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 27 of 38property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested. This threat must be with the intent to cause alarm to the person threatened or to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or omit to do an act which he is entitled to do. Mere expression of any words without any intent to cause alarm would not be sufficient to bring home an offence under Section 506 of the IPC. The material and evidence must be placed on record to show that the threat was made with an intent to cause alarm to the complainant, or to cause them to do, or omit to do an act. Considering the statutory mandate, offence under Section 506 is not shown even if we accept the allegation as correct. 40. In view of the aforesaid position, we quash the chargesheet and the summoning order. The appellants are discharged. We clarify that the observations made above will have no bearing on the civil proceedings, if any, already initiated or which may be initiated in future by the respondent/complainant. B.

--- JUDGMENT 310 ---
Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 5419/2022 • On 26.06.2019 the complainant – Wakeel Ahmad filed a complaint before the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, alleging that the accused persons, including the appellant – Imran, routinely take money on the pretext of bainama of property, and subsequently deny entering into such agreement and receiving any money. • The court allowed the said complaint and ordered the concerned Police Station to register the complaint under Sections 420 and 120B IPC. FIR No. 519/2019 dated 26.07.2019 was registered at Police Station Chandpur, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. The complainant also stated that the accused persons had threatened the complainant against pursuing legal action against them. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 28 of 38• By an order dated 19.09.2019, the High Court partly allowed the appellant’s anticipatory bail application and directed the police not to arrest the appellant till the submission of the chargesheet. • Chargesheet No. 582/2019 dated 18.10.2019 was filed, submitting that charges under Sections 420 and 120B IPC are established. The chargesheet lists the details of the accused as mentioned in the FIR and the relevant column relating to brief facts in the chargesheet reads: “Requesting to the Hon’ble Court is that on 28.07.2019 the Hon’ble Court ordered under section 156(3) Cr. P.C. for registering a FIR No. 519/2019 under the section of 420, 120B IPC against 1. Ziyauddin S/o Gyasudding aged about 70 years 2. Zamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin aged about 65 years 3. Kamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin aged about 50 years 4. Rahisuddin S/o. Unknown 5. Imran aged about 36 years S/o Zamaluddin 6. Kahsif S/o Zamaluddin aged about 31 all are residence of Mohalla Ktarmal, kasba Chandpur, Chanpur, Bijnor, UP. the crime under section 420, 120B IPC is proved against the Ziyauddin S/o Gyasudding, Zamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin, Kamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin, Rahisuddin S/o Unknown, Imran S/o Zamaluddin, Kahsif S/o Zamaluddin. Hence, filing this charge sheet before the Hon’ble court and requesting to this Hon’ble court to punish the all the accused.” • By an order dated 10.05.2021, the Allahabad High Court granted interim anticipatory bail to the appellant till 03.01.2022, in terms of the conditions mentioned in the order, and observed that the appellant herein may approach the High Court again if so advised, in case of a change in circumstances. • On 23.03.2022, Allahabad High Court dismissed the Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application No.2235/2022 filed by the appellant, on the grounds of non-bailable warrants having been issued against the appellant and the chargesheet having been filed. • Hence, the appellant has filed the present appeal. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 311 ---
Page 29 of 3841. We have already referred to the facts and also to the ingredients of the offence under Section 420 IPC. The assertions made in the FIR allege that the accused are frauds who have taken bainama (earnest money on the property), but thereafter are making excuses. The complainant had visited the accused at their house who had then threatened them to implicate them in false cases. They denied having received the money. 42. We allow the present appeal and direct that in the event of the appellant being arrested, he shall be released on bail by the arresting officer/investigating officer/trial court on the terms and conditions to be fixed by the trial court. 43. However, what is surprising and a matter of concern in the present case, is that the police had initially rightly not registered the FIR, which had prompted the complainant to approach the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chandpur, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh, alleging that he is an honest and respected person in the society and is well established in business, while the accused are fraudulent individuals. The Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had subsequently ordered for the FIR to be registered on the basis of the written complaint. 44. We would also like to emphasise on the need for a Magistrate to be cautious in examining whether the facts of the case disclose a civil or a criminal wrong. Attempts at initiating vexatious criminal proceedings should be thwarted early on, as a summoning order, or even a direction to register an FIR, has grave consequences for setting the criminal proceedings in motion.27 Any effort to settle civil disputes and claims which do not involve any criminal offence, by 27 Deepak Gaba and Others v. State of U.P.

--- JUDGMENT 312 ---
9482/2021 • The complainant and Respondent No. 2 herein – Rajesh Wangvelu made a written complaint to the Station Officer, Police Station Aliganj, Lucknow, alleging that on 23.12.2019 at about 12:15 p.m. two officers of the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow29, namely, Bachhan Singh Rawat, Security Officer and Mahendra Kumar, Division Clerk/Caretaker had attacked him with a helmet and lathi, and had threatened to kill him. At about 1:12 p.m. FIR No. 556/2019 dated 23.12.2019 was registered against Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar under Section 323, 504 and 506 IPC. • A statement under Section 161 of the Code was also recorded, where Rajesh Wangvelu stated that he was discriminated against for belonging to a different State. He had done nothing wrong and did not allow his subordinates to do anything wrong, for which reason Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahender Kumar remained angry with him. He added in his statement that the appellant – Manager Singh was also present during this altercation. He had abused him and stated – “maaro sale ko, bahut imandaar banta hai” i.e., “hit him, he wants to be too honest”. Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar had hit him till he fainted. When he regained consciousness, they had left the place. • Manager Singh, as the Director General of the NRLC, claims that he had noticed several discrepancies and administrative errors committed by Rajesh Wangvelu, who was working as the Library and Information Officer. 28 Indian Oil Corpn.

--- JUDGMENT 313 ---
v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others, (2006) 6 SCC 736. 29 “NRLC”, for short. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 31 of 38• After issuing show-cause notices to Rajesh Wangvelu and considering his response, the Ministry of Culture issued a letter dated 02.08.2019, under the signature of appellant, indicating that Rajesh Wangvelu prima facie appeared to have committed temporary embezzlement of Rs. 38,338/- and for which action should be taken. • A decision to shift the library was also confirmed by a committee, to which Rajesh Wangvelu had expressed his displeasure. On the day of shifting, i.e. 23.12.2019, a physical altercation occurred between Rajesh Wangvelu and the officers Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar. • Manager Singh has relied upon written communication of Bachhan Singh Rawat in which he has stated that on 23.12.2019 at about 12:00 noon, he was informed by Mahendra Kumar, that Rajesh Wangvelu had taken some items in his bag without the gate pass. Information in this regard had been given to Manager Singh and the Vigilance Officer. When Bachhan Singh Rawat had tried to frisk Rajesh Wangvelu, he had, in presence of another staff member Dr. Neeta Nigam, threatened Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar with dire consequences and had sprayed chemical on their faces. Rajesh Wangvelu had assaulted them and thereupon had run away from the spot. On 23.12.2019 Manager Singh had accordingly written a letter to the Station Officer of Aliganj Police Station, informing him of the incident. Manager Singh is also relying on the communication dated 26.12.2019 written by him to the Director General of Police, Lucknow, and the communication dated 06.01.2020 by the appellant Manager Singh to the sub-inspector, and inquiry officer Police Station Aliganj. • Rajesh Wangvelu was examined at 01:30 p.m., and his medical legal report dated 23.12.2019 refers to six injuries which have been found to be caused by a hard and blunt object. The injuries were simple. Rajesh Wangvelu, however, Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No.

--- JUDGMENT 314 ---
1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 32 of 38also relies upon a report dated 24.12.2019, obtained by a private diagnostic centre, which states that there was a fracture at the head of the fifth metacarpal bone of the left hand. • Manager Singh filed a petition for quashing of the proceedings arising out of FIR No. 556/2019 before the Allahabad High Court. He was given the benefit of arrest till the filing of the chargesheet, by an order of the High Court dated 09.01.2020. • On 04.02.2020, a chargesheet was filed with an addition of Sections 308, 325 and 120B IPC, and impleading Manager Singh as an accused. The chargesheet under Section 173 of the Code, submitted before the court in the present case, under the column relating to brief facts of the case reads as under: “Sir, the aforesaid case was registered on the basis of written report/complaint of the complainant of the case and the investigation was being done by the S.I. Shri Ramchandra Mishra. On 15.01.2020 I have received the investigation. During the investigation, on the basis of the statement of the complainant as well as on the basis of medical report, section 120B/308/325 IPC was added and the name of accused Manager Singh has come into light, in which Bachan Sing Rawat and Mahendra Kumar were sent in judicial custody on 24.12.19. Till the filing of charge sheet, the accused Manager Singh has been granted stay of arrest by the court. The offences under Section 323/504/506/120B/308/325 IPC are duly proved against the accused Bachan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manger Singh. Therefore, charge sheet is filed against the accused Bachan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manager Singh under Section 323/504/506/120B/308/325 IPC before the Hon’ble Court. It is requested to summon the proof and punish and accused.” • On the chargesheet being submitted in the court of the Magistrate, order dated 10.02.2020 was passed recording that the chargesheet has been submitted for offences under 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308, 325 of the IPC against Bachhan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manager Singh. The order, taking cognisance and issuing summons, reads: Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 33 of 38“The chargesheet was filed under the offence number 556/2019, Section 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308, 325, IPC, Police Station Aliganj against the accused Bachan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manager Singh. Reviewed all prosecution forms.

--- JUDGMENT 315 ---
The grounds for taking cognizance are sufficient. Cognizance is taken. ORDER Register the case. The copies are ready attached. Accused Bachan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar are out on bail. Jamanatnama is attached in the file and the arrest of the accused Manager Singh was a stay on the arrest till the filing of the chargesheet in the sequence of the order of the Hon’ble High Court, Miscellaneous Bench – 262/2020 order dated 09-01-20. Summons issued against the accused. Giving copy for paperwork. Attendance should be presented on 01-03-2020.” • It appears that the matter was taken up for hearing by the Special Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow on 18.02.2021, which records the presence of the counsel for Rajesh Wangvelu and that application for exemption from personal appearance was moved on behalf of Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar. Manager Singh was absent and bailable warrants were issued against him, and he was required to appear on 04.03.2021. • On 04.03.2021, an application for exemption from personal appearance was moved on behalf of Manager Singh on the ground that he had gone out for personal reasons where he had taken ill. This application was rejected on 04.03.2021 by the Special Chief Judicial Magistrate, recording that Manager Singh had not obtained bail till then and there is no provision for granting exemption from personal appearance prior to obtaining bail. Therefore, non- bailable warrants have been issued against him. • Another order dated 04.03.2021 records that bailable warrants were issued against Manager Singh but he had remained absent. To ensure his personal appearance non-bailable warrants were issued against him. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 34 of 38• By the impugned order dated 16.03.2021, the High Court had dismissed the petition filed by Manager Singh under Section 482 of the Code, to quash the criminal proceedings against him. • On 03.09.2021, the High Court granted a further period of 10 days’ time to Manager Singh to surrender. He did not surrender and filed another application seeking extension of time to surrender. • On 03.12.2021, Manager Singh filed the present appeal challenging correctness of the impugned order dated 16.03.2021. • Rajesh Wangvelu has, before us, referred to FIR No. 224 of 2020 registered under Sections 406, 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC on account of certain contracts having been awarded by Manager Singh, Dr. Neeta Nigam, Bachhan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar, to M/s. V.K. Singh Construction Company, Punjab, in which case a final report has been submitted to the court. He has also referred to an office order dated 03.09.2021 passed by the Government of India, Ministry of Culture, terminating services of Manager Singh with immediate effect. 45. Having regard to the facts of the present case, including the chargesheet as filed, which in our opinion is bereft of all details and particulars, we quash the summoning order against Manager Singh. The Special Chief Judicial Magistrate, would re-examine the entire matter in terms of the observations made in the present judgment and thereupon proceed in accordance with law. 46. We, however, would allow the present appeal to the extent that the non- bailable warrants issued against Manager Singh are unsustainable and should be quashed. It is a settled position of law that non-bailable warrants cannot be issued in a routine manner and that the liberty of an individual cannot be curtailed unless necessitated by the larger interest of public and the State. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 316 ---
Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 35 of 38While there are no comprehensive set of guidelines for the issuance of non- bailable warrants, this Court has observed on several occasions that non- bailable warrants should not be issued, unless the accused is charged with a heinous crime, and is likely to evade the process of law or tamper/destroy evidence.30 47. Further, the observation that there is no provision for granting exemption from personal appearance prior to obtaining bail, is not correct, as the power to grant exemption from personal appearance under the Code31 should not be read in a restrictive manner as applicable only after the accused has been granted bail. This Court in Maneka Sanjay Gandhi and Another v. Rani Jethmalani32 held that the power to grant exemption from personal appearance should be exercised liberally, when facts and circumstances require such exemption.33 Section 205 states that the Magistrate, exercising his discretion, may dispense with the personal attendance of the accused while issuing summons, and allow them to appear through their pleader. While provisions of the Code are considered to be exhaustive, cases arise where the Code is silent and the court has to make such order as the ends of justice require. In such cases, the criminal court must act on the principle, that every procedure which is just and fair, is understood as permissible, till it is shown to be expressly or impliedly prohibited by law.34 48. It is also directed that Manager Singh shall be released on bail by the arresting officer/ investigating officer/trial court on the terms and conditions to be fixed 30 Inder Mohan Goswami and Another v. State of Uttaranchal and Others, (2007) 12 SCC 1; Vikas v.

--- JUDGMENT 317 ---
State of Rajasthan, (2014) 3 SCC 321. 31 Section 205 of the Code. Also see, Section 317 of the Code. 32 (1979) 4 SCC 167. 33 See also, Puneet Dalmia v. Central Bureau of Investigation, Hyderabad, (2020) 12 SCC 695. 34 See, Popular Muthiah v. State Represented by Inspector of Police (2006) 7 SCC 296 and earlier judgment of the Calcutta High Court in Rahim Sheikh (1923) 50 Cal 872, 875. Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 36 of 38by the trial court in connection with the chargesheet originating from FIR No. 556 of 2019. The direction given by the High Court in its order dated 09.01.2020 restricting the grant of anticipatory bail till the filing of the chargesheet is accordingly modified. We have issued the said direction in exercise of power under Article 142 read with Article 136 of the Constitution of India in view of the peculiar facts of the present case, including issue of non- bailable warrants etc. by the court of Special Chief Judicial Magistrate. CONCLUSION 49. In view of the aforesaid discussion, (i) the appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1074/2017 preferred by Sharif Ahmed and Adil is allowed and the criminal proceedings are quashed; (ii) the appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 5419/2022 is allowed with the direction that in the event of being arrested, the appellants – Imran and Kamaluddin shall be released on anticipatory bail in connection with the chargesheet under Sections 420 and 120B IPC arising out of FIR No. 519/2019 dated 26.07.2019 registered at Police Station Chandpur, District Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh on terms and conditions to be fixed by the trial court. In addition, the appellants – Imran and Kamaluddin shall comply with the conditions mentioned in Section 438(2) of the Code; (iii) the appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9482/2021 preferred by Manager Singh is partly allowed by – (a) quashing the summoning order issued against Manager Singh, with an order of remand to the Magistrate in terms of the observations in this judgment; Crl. Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No. 1074 of 2017 & Ors. Page 37 of 38(b) quashing the non-bailable warrants issued against Manager Singh; and (c) directing release of Manager Singh on bail by the arresting officer/investigating officer/trial court on terms and conditions fixed by the trial court in connection with the chargesheet under Sections 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308 and 325 IPC, arising out of FIR No. 556/2019 dated 23.12.2019 registered at Police Station Aliganj, District Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. ......................................J.

--- JUDGMENT 318 ---
1. The appellant filed a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the Karnataka High Court, challenging the order imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/— under the provisions of Section 11(2) of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (for short, ‘the FT Act’). The said Writ Petition was dismissed. By the impugned judgment, a Writ Appeal against the order of the learned Single Judge was dismissed. 2. The appellant was formerly known as Emmellen Biotech Pharmaceuticals Limited, which amalgamated with Karnataka Malladi Biotics Limited based on an order of the Bombay High Court dated 24th March 2009. Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 1 of 8FACTUAL ASPECT 3. A few factual aspects will have to be set out. Karnataka Malladi Biotics Limited (for short, ‘Karnataka Biotics’) obtained an Export Promotion Capital Goods Licence (for short, ‘the licence’), which enabled it to import certain capital equipment at a concessional rate of customs duty. Under the licence, Karnataka Biotics was permitted to import capital goods worth Rs. 23,38,882/- equivalent to US$ 64,987 CIF value, subject to the condition of the appellant exporting the finished goods worth US$ 2,59,948 and earning an equivalent amount in a freely convertible foreign currency within five years from the date of the licence. Karnataka Biotics imported goods as permitted under the licence and commenced commercial production. However, the Board for Industrial Finance and Reconstruction (for short, ‘BIFR’), in its meeting dated 11th August 1999, declared Karnataka Biotics as a sick unit under Section 3(1)(o) of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (for short, ‘SICA’). The said company submitted a rehabilitation proposal to the operating agency. As Karnataka Biotics had enjoyed the benefit of concessional duty, a demand notice was issued by the Commissioner of Customs on 3rd April 2002, making a demand for the differential duty of Rs. 5,38,525/- from Karnataka Biotics. As the said company could not pay the demanded amount, a sum of Rs. 4,86,800/- was recovered by enforcing the bank guarantee furnished by the said company. 4. On June 3, 2003, the BIFR sanctioned Karnataka Biotics' rehabilitation scheme under Section 18 of SICA. On July 16, 2004, the third respondent passed an Order-in-Original imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/— on Karnataka Biotics for Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 2 of 8non-fulfilment of export obligation under the licence. An appeal preferred before the appellate authority against the said demand was dismissed, and a review filed before the Central Government was rejected. 5. In 2007, a Writ Petition was filed by the Karnataka Biotics before the High Court of Karnataka to challenge the demand for penalty. On 24th March 2009, Karnataka Biotics amalgamated with Emmellen Biotech Pharmaceuticals Limited under the orders of the High Court. Accordingly, a certificate of incorporation for the change of the name of Emmellen Biotech Pharmaceuticals Limited to M/s Embio Limited (appellant herein) was issued. The Writ Petition filed by Karnataka Biotics was allowed by a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court. The respondents challenged the same by filing a Writ Appeal. A Division Bench of the High Court disposed of the appeal by granting permission to withdraw the Writ Petition with the liberty to file a fresh Writ Petition, presumably in view of the amalgamation. 6. The present appellant filed a Writ Petition before the High Court of Karnataka. The learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition by the order dated 14th November 2017. One of the grounds of dismissal was that Karnataka Biotics had withdrawn the earlier Writ Petition without reserving any liberty to reagitate the same issue. By the impugned judgment, a writ appeal preferred by the appellant against the order of the Single Judge was dismissed on the ground that Karnataka Biotics had withdrawn the earlier Writ Petition without reserving any liberty to reagitate the issues involved. Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 3 of 8SUBMISSIONS 7. The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has invited our attention to the rehabilitation scheme of Karnataka Biotics sanctioned by the BIFR, which provides for waiver of the custom duty of Rs. 33.30 lakhs on account of non-fulfilment of the export obligation on the part of the Karnataka Biotics and interest accrued thereon. He submitted that as there was a duty waiver, there was no question of imposing any penalty. Secondly, he submitted that both the learned Single Judge and Division Bench completely ignored that while Karnataka Biotics was permitted to withdraw the earlier Writ Petition, a liberty was granted to file a fresh one. He pointed out to the order of the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in this regard. He invited our attention to the Order-in-Original passed by the 3rd respondent imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/- under Section 11(2) of the FT Act. The learned senior counsel would submit that non-fulfilment of export obligation under the licence is not a ground under Section 11 (2) of the FT Act to impose a penalty. He submitted that the order imposing penalty under Section 11 (2) of the FT Act was completely illegal. 8. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that under the scheme of rehabilitation of Karnataka Biotics, there was no clause granting a waiver of penalty which could be imposed on the ground of non-fulfilment of export obligation under the license. Learned counsel submitted that there was a contravention of the terms of the licence, and therefore, the respondents were well within their powers to impose the penalty. Learned senior counsel appearing for the Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 4 of 8appellant relied upon various decisions of the High Courts of Gujarat and Delhi to support his contentions. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 9. At the outset, we may note that the first error committed by the Division Bench and learned Single Judge was by recording a finding that the first Writ Petition filed by Karnataka Biotics was withdrawn without seeking a liberty to file a fresh Writ Petition. We may note here that on 9th February 2007, the first Writ Petition was filed by Karnataka Biotics. On 24th March 2009, there was an amalgamation of Karnataka Biotics. Even after the amalgamation, the Writ Petition filed in the name of Karnataka Biotics was prosecuted. The order dated 13th December 2013 passed by a Division Bench of Karnataka High Court records that an application was moved by the respondent in the appeal seeking permission to withdraw the Writ Petition by reserving liberty to file a fresh petition on the same cause of action by impleading proper parties. The Division Bench permitted withdrawal of the main Writ Petition by expressly granting liberty to file a fresh Writ Petition on the same cause of action within one week from receipt of a copy of the judgment. The grant of liberty has been recorded explicitly in paragraph 4 of the order of the Division Bench. The present appellant filed a fresh Writ Petition not within one week but after six months of the said order. As liberty was reserved to file a fresh petition, the Writ Petition filed by the appellant could not have been dismissed on the ground that while withdrawing the earlier Writ Petition, liberty to file a fresh petition was not granted. Perhaps both the learned Single Judge and Division Bench have ignored Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 5 of 8clause 4 of the order of the Division Bench dated 13th December 2013.

--- JUDGMENT 319 ---
Section 11 of the FT Act reads thus: “11. Contravention of provisions of this Act, rules, orders and foreign trade policy.—(1) No export or import shall be made by any person except in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the rules and orders made thereunder and the foreign trade policy for the time being in force. (2) Where any person makes or abets or attempts to make any export or import in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder or the foreign trade policy, he shall be liable to a penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees and not more than five times the value of the goods or services or technology in respect of which any contravention is made or attempted to be made, whichever is more. ……………………………………………………... ……………………………………………………” (emphasis added) Sub-Section (2) applies when any import or export is made in contravention of any provision of the FT Act, Rules, and orders made thereunder or the foreign trade policy. 13. In the present case, there is no allegation made by the respondents against the appellant's predecessor of making or attempting to make any export or import in contravention of the FT Act, any Rules or orders made thereunder, or the foreign Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021 Page 7 of 8trade policy. Under the license granted to the appellant’s predecessor, there was an obligation to export finished goods by earning foreign exchange equivalent to USD 2,59,948 within a period of five years. The allegation is of the failure to abide by the obligation to export the finished goods within a period of five years. So, there is no allegation of attempting to make an export or import, which is covered by Section 11 (2). There is no allegation against the appellant or its predecessor of making an export or import in contravention of the export and import policy. Section 11 (2) is a penal provision. It must be strictly construed. Thus, the demand for penalty cannot be sustained. Hence, we set aside the impugned judgments and orders of the learned Single Judge and Division Bench. We also set aside the Order- in-Original dated 16th July 2004 (Annexure P-3) by which the impugned penalty was imposed. 14. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed with no orders as to costs. ……………………..J.

--- JUDGMENT 320 ---
2. The appellant Sandeep along with two others viz., Veer Singh and Dharamveer, was tried for having caused the murder of one Abdul Hameed on 30.10.1997 at 9.45 p.m., and thereby committed the offence under section 302 r/w 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “the IPC”) and section 25/27 of 1hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court” 2Sandeep v. State of Uttarakhand 3hereinafter shortly referred to as “the Sessions Court” 4State v. Veer Singh and two others2 the Arms Act, 1959 (for short, “the Arms Act”). The Sessions Court, in the aforesaid Sessions Trial No.208 of 1998, found the appellant guilty of the offence under section 302 r/w Section 34 IPC, convicted and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life with fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of three months, while acquitting the other two co-accused. The Sessions Court in the connected Sessions Trial No.209 of 19985, acquitted the appellant of the offence under section 25/27 of the Arms Act. Feeling aggrieved and being dissatisfied with the judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the Sessions Court in Sessions Trial No.208 of 1998, the appellant went on Criminal Appeal No.65 of 2006, which ended in dismissal by the impugned judgment and order dated 16.12.2011 passed by the High Court. 3. Shorn off unnecessary details, the case of the prosecution is that on 31.10.1997, one Kale Hasan (P.W.1 / complainant) S/o Abdul Hameed, resident of village Dosni, lodged a written report (Ext.A-1) to Police Station Laksar, District Haridwar, alleging that on the midnight of 30.10.1997, while his father Abdul Hameed (deceased) and his mother Mangti were sitting in their courtyard and were talking to each other, at about 09:45 p.m., four persons viz., Veer Singh S/o Jaswant Singh, Mintu S/o Molhar, Dharamveer S/o.Brhampal and Sandeep (appellant herein), all residents of Dosni village, came there and told to his father that they would teach him a lesson for refusing to give them jaggery (GUR) and 5State v. Sandeep3 shot at his father. On hearing the sound of the gun-shot, the complainant, along with Gufran Ali (P.W.2) and Naseem, reached the courtyard and saw that all the four accused persons, after shooting, were fleeing away from the scene of crime. Thereafter, the injured Abdul Hammed was taken to the Government Hospital, Laksar for treatment, where the doctor declared him dead. 4. On the basis of the written report, Chik report (Ext.A-13) was prepared and a case in Laskar Police Station Crime No.185 of 1997 was registered against all the four accused for the offence under section 302 IPC. The Sub Inspector of Police Satish Verma, during the course of investigation, inspected the scene of crime and prepared inquest report (Ext.A4) on the body of the deceased and site plan (Ext.A9). On 31.10.1997, the Investigating Officer recorded the statements of the witnesses; recovered one country-made pistol 12 bore and one empty cartridge concealed in the field of Dharmdas under a transformer, on pointing out by the appellant; and prepared recovery memo (Ext.A3) and plan for the place of recovery (Ext.A10). That apart, the Investigating Officer collected bloodstained soil and plain soil (Ext.A5) and took possession of the articles viz., a torch with three batteries (Ext.A2), a bloodstain cot (Ext.A6), a quilt-cover, a cotton blanket and a quilt (Ext.A7) and a lantern (Ext.A11). Thereafter, the body of the deceased Abdul Hameed along with inquest report (Ext.A4) was sent for post-mortem. Dr.R.K.Verma, Physician (P.W.7) conducted post-mortem on 31.10.1997 and gave autopsy report; and according to his opinion, the cause of death was due to4 shock and hemorrhage as a result of fire arm ante mortem injuries; and that the wound of entry could be caused by one bullet. In the meanwhile, the Investigating Officer sent the samples for chemical analysis and obtained a report from Forensic Science Lab, Agra (Ext.A18).

--- JUDGMENT 321 ---
5. After completion of investigation, the Investigating Officer filed charge sheet (Ext.A8) on 27.12.1997 against all the four accused for the offence under section 302 IPC. Upon getting sanction (Ext.A17) from the District Magistrate, Haridwar, charge sheet (Ext.A15) was filed against the appellant herein, for the offence under section 25/27 of the Arms Act. After committal, the learned Additional District Judge, Roorkee, framed charge against all the accused for the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC. The file relating to accused Mintu was sent to Juvenile Court, vide order dated 01.01.2003. 6. Before the Sessions Court, in order to prove the guilt of the accused viz., Veer Singh, Dharamveer and the appellant herein, the prosecution examined P.W.1 to P.W.9 witnesses and marked Ext.A1 to A17 documents, besides material objects. However, no oral and documentary evidence were let in, on the side of the accused. During section 313 Cr.P.C questioning, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 7. After considering the evidence on record, the Sessions Court as already noticed in paragraph 2 supra, found the appellant guilty of the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC, convicted him and sentenced him for the same, while5 acquitting the other two co-accused, by the judgment dated 16.05.2006 in Sessions Trial No.208 of 1998. However, the appellant was found not guilty of the offence under section 25/27 of the Arms Act and was acquitted of the same by the same judgment dated 16.05.2006, but in Sessions Trial No.209 of 1998. The judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the Sessions Court in Sessions Trial No.208 of 1998 was also affirmed by the High Court. Therefore, the appellant is before us with the present Criminal Appeal. 8. This Court, by order dated 27.01.20206 disposed of Interlocutory Application No.60285/2019 in Criminal Appeal No.2224/2014 filed by the appellant by releasing him on bail, on certain terms. 9.

--- JUDGMENT 322 ---
We have heard Mrs. Sudha Gupta, learned counsel appointed to espouse the cause of the appellant and Mr. Akshat Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent – State and also perused the materials on record. 10. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant strenuously argued that as per the prosecution story, four persons were involved in the crime and they were charge sheeted for the same offence; in the FIR, there was no specific role assigned to the appellant and all the accused played identical role; and after joint trial, two co-accused were acquitted of the offence under section 6Having heard learned counsel and perusing the records, we order that the appellant be released on bail in Sessions Trial No. 208 of 1998 on the usual conditions to the satisfaction of the concerned trial court. The interlocutory application for bail stands disposed of. Hearing of the appeal expedited.6 302 r/w 34 IPC. While so, the Sessions Court ought to have extended the benefit of doubt and acquitted the appellant as well. The learned counsel further submitted that the appellant was acquitted of the charge under section 25/27 of the Arms Act arising out of the same crime, and hence, the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC is improbable. 10.1. Taking us through the evidence led by the prosecution, the learned counsel argued that the prosecution projected P.W.1 and P.W.2 as eye-witnesses to the occurrence; it is their deposition that they saw that the deceased was shot and got injuries, by which he was bleeding; and they took the deceased to hospital; but they did not get bloodstains on their clothes. That apart, the occurrence happened on 30.10.1997 at 9.45 p.m., however, source of light at the scene of crime was not mentioned in the FIR. Though P.W.1 and P.W.2 stated in their evidence that all the accused were armed with weapons in their hands, the FIR did not disclose as to which accused was in possession of which weapon and as to who shot the bullet. The fact of provoking and the fact of possession of the weapons by the accused persons were not mentioned in the statement recorded under section 161 CrPC, which were also accepted by the Investigating officer in his deposition. Thus, it was submitted that these discrepancies / inconsistencies / contradictions in the case of the prosecution falsify the testimonies of P.W.1 and P.W.2 qua involvement of the appellant in the crime.7 10.2. It was further argued by the learned counsel that the only eye-witness to the occurrence viz., Mangti - wife of the deceased and the Sub Inspector of Police, who conducted investigation, were not examined, which are fatal to the prosecution case. She further submitted that the motive for murder i.e., the accused demanding jaggery, the deceased denying the same and the accused committing the crime, appears to be very vague. Therefore, the learned counsel submitted that the prosecution has not established the charge framed against the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Without analysing the evidence in proper perspective, the Sessions Court erroneously convicted the appellant alone and sentenced him for the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC, and the same was also affirmed by the High Court. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed that the judgments of conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant should be set aside. 10.3. In the alternative, it was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant has already suffered incarceration for more than 14 years and therefore, a lenient view may be taken, qua sentence awarded by the Courts below. 11. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent – State contended that it is proved from the evidence of P.W.l and P.W.2 that the appellant shot the deceased and escaped from the scene of occurrence. PW1 specifically stated that he had seen the appellant, while firing bullet shot on his8 father; and after causing bullet shot, all the accused persons ran away. P.W.2 - Gufran Ali also clearly stated that it was only the appellant who shot the deceased and not the other co-accused. Adding further, the learned counsel submitted that P.W.2 deposed that the accused Veer Singh having a spear, appellant having a country-made pistol and Dharamveer and Mintu having lathis, came to the house of the deceased and on exhortation given by the co-accused, the appellant fired bullet shot by country-made pistol on the deceased which hit on his right chest and arm. PW4 Akbar stated in his evidence that the country-made pistol was recovered by the police on pointing out by the appellant. It is also proved from the evidence of P.W.2 that at the time of occurrence, there was sufficient source of light for identification of the accused. Hence, the charge framed against the appellant was duly proved by the prosecution. 11.1. With respect to non-examination of some witnesses, it was submitted by the learned counsel that such lapse is insufficient to discard the ocular evidence led by the prosecution. 11.2. Thus, according to the learned counsel, upon proper appreciation of the material evidence, the Sessions Court rightly convicted the appellant of the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC as also affirmed by the High Court and hence, there is no requirement to interfere with such concurrent findings rendered by the Courts below.9 12. As pointed out earlier, in connection with murder of the father of the complainant on 30.10.1997 at 9.45 p.m., the appellant was subjected to criminal prosecution, along with three accused viz., Veer Singh, Mintu and Dharamveer for the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC. By order dated 01.01.2003, the case pertaining to the accused Mintu was remitted to the Juvenile Court. The Sessions Court convicted the appellant for the said offence, while acquitting the other two accused. Be it noted, for the same crime, the appellant was also charge sheeted for the offence under section 25/27 of the Arms Act, but he was acquitted of the same. 13. In order to appreciate the contentions raised on behalf of the respective parties, let us examine the evidence let in before the Sessions Court. 13.1. The prosecution heavily relied on the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.2, who are said to be eye-witnesses to the occurrence. PW1 Kale Hasan – complainant / son of the deceased, deposed that on 30.10.1997 at about 9.45 p.m., his parents viz., Abdul Hameed and Mangti Devi, were sitting in their Baithak Chappar (courtyard) and talking with each other; the four accused persons came there; the appellant had a katta in his hand, Veer Singh had a ballam, and Dharamveer and Mintu had sticks in their hands; they came to the door of Baithak; Dharamveer, Mintu and Veer Singh asked the appellant to shoot his father and teach him a lesson for not giving jaggery; the appellant fired bullet on his father which hit on his chest and left arm; on hearing the sound of bullet shot, P.W.2, Gufran Ali and10 Nasim immediately reached the spot; they saw the accused persons fleeing away, after firing; they chased them, but did not catch them; and all the four accused ran away. He further stated in his deposition that he, Gufran Ali and Nasim took the deceased to Laksar Hospital where the doctor declared him dead and asked to take him to Police Station; then, they came to Police Station and narrated the incident to Daroga, who advised them to lodge a report against the accused persons; and he (P.W.1) had written report (Ext.A1) and given it to Police Station. 13.2. P.W.2 Gufran Ali / grandson of the deceased corroborated the evidence of P.W.1. He categorically stated that all the accused were armed with weapons; the appellant shot the deceased by a katta which hit on his chest; and he had a torch in his hand; and he tried to hold the accused, but they fled away. 13.3. P.W.3 Furkan stated about the material objects, such as, lantern, battery having 3 cells, one sole quilt, Dutai and Khes, etc., recovered in the scene of occurrence. 13.4. P.W.4 Akbar deposed that he was one of the members of the police party and in his presence, on pointing out by the appellant, one country made pistol, concealed in the sugarcane field of Dharamdas under a transformer, was recovered. 13.5. P.W.5 Niyamul, a witness of inquest report (Ext.A4) inter alia stated in his evidence that body of the deceased was kept in a white cloth, sealed and sent for post-mortem.11 13.6. P.W.6 Jagat Kumar Singh – Investigating Officer explained about the conduct of investigation. According to him, on receipt of the report, a case was registered against the accused for the offence under section 302 IPC; inquest report (Ext.A4) was prepared; after inspection, site plan (Ext.A9) was marked; statements of the witnesses were recorded; recovery of the material objects was made; samples of bloodstained soil and plain soil were collected; body of the deceased was sent for post-mortem; after investigation, charge sheet (Ext.A8) was filed against four accused under section 302 IPC; and upon getting necessary sanction, charge sheet (Ext.A15) was filed against the appellant for the offence under section 25/27 of the Arms Act. 13.7.

--- JUDGMENT 323 ---
R.K. Verma, Physician deposed that he conducted post mortem on the body of the deceased Abdul Hameed, aged 70 years, on 31.10.1997 at 2:30 p.m. and prepared autopsy report, with the following ante mortem injuries:- (i) Firearm wound of entry 4cm x 2cm muscle deep on medial side of right upper arm 9 cm below the axilla. Blackening and tattooing present around the wound. Margins lacerated and inverted. Two pellets were recovered from the wound. (ii) Firearm wound of entry 3 cm x 2 cm chest cavity deep on lateral side of right chest 11cm below the axilla in mid axillary line. Tattooing and blackening present around the wound in an area of l cm. Margins lacerated and inverted. 5th and 5th ribs are fractured. He further stated in his evidence that the cause of death was due to shock and hemorrhage as a result of firearm ante mortem injuries and the death of the12 deceased could have been caused within 24 hours prior to the time of conducting postmortem; and that both wounds of entry could be caused by one bullet. 13.8. P.W.8 Constable Ramdhan Singh deposed that based on the report of the complainant, he prepared Chik report and entered the case in the G.D. 13.9. P.W.9 Constable Balraj Singh was examined to prove the investigation conducted by the Sub Inspector of Police Satish Verma, who did not come forward to let in evidence. In view of non-examination of the said Officer, the Sessions Court doubted about the sanction accorded by the District Magistrate and accordingly, acquitted the appellant of the charge under section 25/27 of the Arms Act. 14. Upon scrutiny of the depositions of the material witnesses as well as the exhibits produced by the prosecution, predominantly, it is evident that on 30.10.1997 at 9.45 p.m., the deceased died due to the injuries sustained by firing of bullet. P.W.1 and P.W.2 clearly demonstrated in their deposition that the accused were having weapons and on exhortation by other accused, the appellant shot the deceased. The source of light in the scene of crime was explained by P.W.2 in his evidence. The evidence of P.W.3 proved that the material objects were recovered from the scene of crime. The fact that there was a torch and a lantern is recorded in Exts.A2 and A11. The statement of P.W.1 and P.W.2 corroborates with the materials recovered from the scene of occurrence. It is clearly stated by P.W.4 in his evidence that a country made pistol 12 bore and13 one empty cartridge were recovered on identification by the appellant. It is to be seen that even in the FIR, it was mentioned that the deceased victim was shot. There is no delay in lodging the complaint, registering the FIR and filing the charge sheet. 15. Though the learned counsel for the appellant pointed out certain deficiencies / inconsistencies / contradictions in the evidence let in by the prosecution, they being minor in nature, cannot be considered as remissness in the investigation enabling the appellant’s acquittal, particularly, when the appellant was present with a gun in the scene of occurrence, when the gun and empty cartridge were recovered based on the information given by the appellant, when the firing was witnessed by P.W.1 and P.W.2, and when the fact that the victim died due to wounds inflicted by gunshot, stood proved by the evidence of P.W.7, Doctor, who performed the autopsy. The law on minor discrepancies which does not affect the basic case of the prosecution, is well settled. This Court in C.

--- JUDGMENT 324 ---
M.K. Anthony [(1985) 1 SCC 505 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 7 (2010) 9 SCC 567 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1402 : 2010 SCC OnLine SC 946 at page 59614 105], Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat [(1983) 3 SCC 217 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 728 : AIR 1983 SC 753], State of Rajasthan v. Om Prakash [(2007) 12 SCC 381 : (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 411], Prithu v. State of H.P. [(2009) 11 SCC 588 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 1502], State of U.P. v. Santosh Kumar[(2009) 9 SCC 626 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 88] and State v. Saravanan [(2008) 17 SCC 587 : (2010) 4 SCC (Cri) 580] .)” 16. That apart, the acquittal of the appellant under section 25/27 of the Arms Act on a technical ground that the order of sanction by the District Magistrate was rejected as there was no date in the order, cannot come to the aid of the appellant as the extent of proof and procedures for prosecution are different. In the instant case, the charge of murder framed against the appellant stood proved, as narrated above. Insofar as the claim that when the other accused have been acquitted for the same offence, the appellant cannot be convicted, we do not agree with the same. It is proved beyond doubt that the victim died due to gunshot. The presence of the other accused with the alleged weapons was not proved and the victim was not inflicted with any other form of injury. Therefore, the benefit of doubt granted to the other accused, who were acquitted, cannot be extended to the appellant. Accordingly, the conviction under section 302 IPC is confirmed. 17. Insofar as the conviction under section 34 IPC, there is a contradiction in the evidence of the Investigating Officer and the other witnesses on instigation. P.W.1 and P.W.2 had deposed in the court that the other accused instigated the appellant to fire the shot, but on the contrary, the Investigating Officer had deposed that during investigation, it was revealed by the complainant and the15 other witness that the appellant fired on his own. The Sessions Court did not accept the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.2 with regard to the charge framed against other accused and acquitted them. Considering the fact that for a person to be convicted under section 34, there must be an involvement of two or more persons with common intention to commit the crime. Mere presence of the accused at the scene of occurrence is not sufficient. In the present case, after the acquittal of the other accused with a finding that there was nothing in the FIR or statement under section 161 to sustain the charge under section 34 IPC, the appellant remains the sole accused and there could be no charge under section 34 against him. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the conviction of the appellant under section 34 IPC by the Sessions Court as confirmed by the High Court is unsustainable. 18. For the reasons stated above, the concurrent finding recorded by the Sessions Court as affirmed by the High Court that the appellant was found guilty of the offence under section 302 IPC is confirmed. However, the appellant is acquitted of the charge under section 34 IPC and the judgments of the Courts below, insofar as convicting him for the same, are set aside. 19. As far as the sentence is concerned, considering the gravity and nature of the offence and all other relevant factors, the Courts can modify the punishment or reduce / enhance the period of sentence imposed on the accused. At this juncture, it will be apposite to refer to some judgments of this Court. The Constitutional Bench of this Court (majority view) in Union of India v.16 V.Sriharan8, has held that “there is a power which can be derived from IPC to impose a fixed term sentence or modified punishment which can only be exercised by the High Court or in the event of any further appeal, by the Supreme Court and not by any other court”. Placing reliance on the said decision of the Constitutional Bench, this Court in Shiva Kumar @ Shiva @ Shivamurthy v. State of Karnataka9, has observed as follows: “14…We have no manner of doubt that even in a case where capital punishment is not imposed or is not proposed, the constitutional courts can always exercise the power of imposing a modified or fixed-term sentence by directing that a life sentence, as contemplated by “secondly” in Section 53 IPC, shall be of a fixed period of more than fourteen years, for example, of twenty years, thirty years and so on. The fixed punishment cannot be for a period less than 14 years in view of the mandate of Section 433-A Cr.PC.” 19.1. In a recent decision in Navas @ Mulanavas v. State of Kerala10, a Full Bench of this Court, after referring to the judgments in Swamy Shraddananda v. State of Karnataka11 and in V.Sriharan (supra), has emphasised that “while the maximum extent of punishment of either death or life imprisonment is provided for under the relevant provisions, it will be for the courts to decide if in its conclusion, the imposition of death may not be warranted, what should be the number of years of imprisonment that would be judiciously and judicially more appropriate to keep the person under incarceration, by taking into account, apart from the crime itself, from the angle of the commission of such crime or crimes, 8 (2016) 7 SCC 1 : (2016) 2 SCC (Cri) 695 9 (2023) 9 SCC 817 10 2024 SCC OnLine SC 315 11 (2008) 13 SCC 76717 the interest of the society at large or all other relevant factors which cannot be put in any straitjacket formulae”. Upon conducting a detailed survey of 27 cases, it was ultimately stated in Paragraph 59 as follows: “59.A journey through the cases set out hereinabove shows that the fundamental underpinning is the principle of proportionality. The aggravating and mitigating circumstances which the Court considers while deciding commutation of penalty from death to life imprisonment, have a large bearing in deciding the number of years of compulsory imprisonment without remission, too. As a judicially trained mind pores and ponders over the aggravating and mitigating circumstances and in cases where they decide to commute the death penalty, they would by then have a reasonable idea as to what would be the appropriate period of sentence to be imposed under the Swamy Shraddananda (supra) principle too. Matters are not cut and dried and nicely weighed here to formulate a uniform principle. That is where the experience of the judicially trained mind comes in as pointed out in V.

--- JUDGMENT 325 ---
Sriharan (supra). Illustratively in the process of arriving at the number of years as the most appropriate for the case at hand, which the convict will have to undergo before which the remission powers could be invoked, some of the relevant factors that the courts bear in mind are : - (a) the number of deceased who are victims of that crime and their age and gender; (b) the nature of injuries including sexual assault if any; (c) the motive for which the offence was committed; (d) whether the offence was committed when the convict was on bail in another case; (e) the premeditated nature of the offence; (f) the relationship between the offender and the victim; (g) the abuse of trust if any; (h) the criminal antecedents; and whether the convict, if released, would be a menace to the society. Some of the positive factors have been, (1) age of the convict; (2) the probability of reformation of convict; (3) the convict not being a professional killer; (4) the socioeconomic condition of the accused; (5) the composition of the family of the accused and (6) conduct expressing remorse. These were some of the relevant factors that were kept in mind in the cases noticed above while weighing the pros and cons of the matter. The Court would be additionally justified in considering the conduct of the convict in jail; and the period already undergone to arrive at the number of years which the Court feels the convict should, serve as part of the sentence of life imprisonment and before which he cannot apply for remission. These are not meant to be exhaustive but illustrative and each case would depend on the facts and circumstances therein.” 19.2. We shall thus, consider the sentence imposed on the appellant, in the light of the aforesaid guiding principles. The facts and circumstances highlighted above would clearly disclose that due to sudden provocation, for not giving jaggery, the accused came to the house of the deceased and on exhortation by18 other accused, the appellant shot the deceased and that, there was no premeditation in the commission of crime. As already stated above, the appellant was acquitted of the charge under section 25/27 of the Arms Act, arising out of the same crime; and that, he was convicted only for the offence under section 302 r/w 34 IPC, whereas the co-accused were acquitted of the said charge. Further, the certificate dated 08.12.2019 received from the Jailor, District Jail, Haridwar, reveals that the appellant has undergone the sentence for a period of 13 years 6 months and 20 days without remission and the total sentence of 17 years 1 month and 9 days and that, he has good conduct during this period; and thus, it is evident that the appellant served incarceration for more than 14 years and that, he had no bad antecedent except this. On a perusal of the records also shows that the appellant belonged to poor economic background and had been taking care of his entire family; and that there exists a possibility of reformation. Pertinently, it is to be noted that the object of punishment is not only to deter the accused from committing any further crime, but also to reform and retribute; and the extent of reformation can be derived only by the conduct of the accused exhibited during his days of retribution. Taking note of the above aggravating and mitigating factors, we are of the view that it would meet the ends of justice, if the sentence of imprisonment for life awarded by the Sessions Court as affirmed by the High Court, is modified to the period already undergone by the appellant.19 20. Accordingly, we modify the sentence awarded by the Courts below to the period already undergone by the appellant. However, we clarify that the appellant shall pay the fine amount imposed by the Sessions Court, if not paid already. He shall be set at liberty if not required in any other case. The bail bond executed by the appellant stands discharged. 21. Resultantly, this Criminal Appeal stands partly allowed to the extent as indicated above. ................................J.

--- JUDGMENT 326 ---
In order to appreciate the controversy involved in the matter in the proper perspective, it would be beneficial to reproduce the genealogical table/pedigree of the families of the parties. Kishan Lal Madho Lal (Died Mangilal (Died 1912) Issueless in 1929) Widow- Kanwarlal Nandkanwarbai (Died 1954) (Died 1972) Mukat Lal Kailash Chand (Appellant) (on the basis of (adopted by Nandkanwarbai on will dated 12.06.1959 after the 09.02.1949) death of Madho Lal) 2Chronological List of Events: - Dates Event After the death of Kishan Lal, Hindu Undivided Family(HUF) property devolved among his two sons, Mangilal and Madho Lal. 1912 Mangilal passed away. (Survived by his son, Kanwarlal) 1929 Madho Lal passed away (Issueless, survived by his widow- Smt. Nandkanwarbai) 09.02.1949 Kanwarlal executed a will in favour of his son, Mukat Lal (appellant herein). 1954 Kanwarlal Passed Away. First Set of Legal Proceedings 1958 Smt. Nandkanwarbai filed Civil Suit No. 11of 1958 for declaration of title and possession in respect of the suit property. 21.05 .1959 Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958 was dismissed however the Civil Judge held that Smt. Nandkanwarbai had the right to be maintained out of the suit property. 12.06.1959 Smt. Nandkanwarbai adopted Kailash Chand(original respondent herein). 12.07.1966 Mukat Lal preferred Appeal No. 64 of 1966 against order dated 21.05.1959 passed in Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958. 09.02.1968 Civil Judge allowed Appeal No. 64 of 1966 and set aside the order to the extent that it gave Smt. Nandkanwarbai the right to be maintained out of the suit property. Aggrieved, Smt. Nandkanwarbai preferred SB Civil Second Appeal No. 347 of 1968 19 72 Smt. Nandkanwarbai passed away. Kailash Chand was substituted as legal representative of deceased Smt. Nandkanwarbai in 1973. 320.03 .1973 High Court allowed SB Civil Second Appeal No. 347 of 1968 and held that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to the right of maintenance out of the suit property, she being the widow of the deceased coparcener in joint Hindu family property. Present Proceedings 20.06 .1979 Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 under section 53 of Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1956 was filed by Kailash Chand, for partition of the suit property, in the capacity of the legal heir of his adopted mother Smt. Nandkanwarbai. 14.12 .1983 Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 was allowed and decreed by Sub Divisional Officer, Bundi wherein it was held that Kailash Chand being the sole legal heir of Smt. Nandkanwarbai has coparcenary rights over the lands belonging to Madho Lal. 1984 Mukat Lal preferred Appeal No. 12 of 1984 challenging order dated 14.12.1983 before Revenue Appellate Authority, Kota. 31.01 .1986 Revenue Appellate Authority, Kota allowed Appeal No. 12 of 1984 and decree passed by Sub Divisional Magistrate, Bundi dated 14.12.1983 was set aside. 1986 Kailash Chand preferred Second Appeal being S.A. 120 of 1986 before Board of Revenue, Ajmer. 12.03 .1992 Board of Revenue, Ajmer dismissed S.A. 120 of 1986 19 93 Kailash Chand filed a Writ Petition being S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1587 of 1993 before High Court challenging the order passed by Board of Revenue, Ajmer dated 12.03.1992. 21.07 .2006 Ld. Single Judge allowed S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1587 of 1993 and set aside the judgments passed by Revenue Appellate Authority, Kota and Board of Revenue, Ajmer. 20 06 Mukat Lal filed a Writ Appeal being DB Special Appeal (Writ) No. 1029 of 2006 before the Division Bench. 02.11.2017 Ld. Division Bench dismissed DB Special Appeal (Writ) No. 1029 of 2006 and upheld the order of the Ld. Single Judge dated 21.07.2006. 406.02.2018 Present SLP was filed. 5. The core question of law involved in this appeal is as to the right of the plaintiff Kailash Chand being legal heir of Hindu widow Smt. Nandkanwarbai to enforce her right of succession in the unpartitioned Joint Hindu Family property by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘Succession Act’) by filing a suit in the Revenue Court. 6.

--- JUDGMENT 327 ---
Few facts, most germane and relevant to the issue are required to be extracted from the chronology of dates and events. The suit property was owned by Kishan Lal who had two sons, namely, Mangilal and Madho Lal. Madho Lal was married to Smt. Nandkanwarbai. Mangilal had a son Kanwarlal. Mangilal died in the year 1912 whereas Madho Lal died issueless in 1929. Smt. Nandkanwarbai claims to have adopted plaintiff Kailash Chand on 12th June, 1959 that is nearly after 30 years from the date of death of Madho Lal. Kanwarlal had executed a will of the entire unpartitioned estate in favour of defendant Mukat Lal(appellant herein) on 9th February, 1949. Shri Kanwarlal passed away in the year 1954. Thus, the suit property devolved upon defendant Mukat Lal under the will executed by late Shri Kanwarlal. 57. Smt. Nandkanwarbai, widow of late Madho Lal filed a Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958 seeking a declaration of title and possession over the suit property contending that the property in question was a joint Hindu family property and that the will allegedly executed by late Kanwarlal was illegal. It was further contended in the suit that defendant Mukat Lal was not entitled to any share in the HUF property by virtue of the will. The Civil Court dismissed the said suit vide judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 while recognizing the right of Smt. Nandkanwarbai only to the extent of receiving maintenance from the suit property. 8. Smt. Nandkanwarbai, did not challenge the said judgment any further. However, defendant Mukat Lal on attaining majority, preferred an appeal against the judgment dated 21st May, 1959 which was allowed by the learned Senior Civil Judge vide judgment dated 9th February, 1968 and the judgment and decree passed by the civil Court in favour of Smt. Nandkanwarbai to the extent of the right to receive maintenance from the suit property was set aside. 9. Being aggrieved, Smt. Nandkanwarbai preferred a Second Appeal No. 347 of 1968 before the learned Single Judge of Rajasthan High Court. During the pendency of the said second 6appeal, in the year 1972 Smt. Nandkanwarbai passed away and her legal heir i.e. plaintiff Kailash Chand was taken on record. Learned Single Judge of Rajasthan High Court, vide judgment dated 20th March, 1973 allowed the second appeal filed by Smt. Nandkanwarbai and restored the civil Court’s judgment to the extent of her right to be maintained from the suit property. Resultantly, the status of defendant Mukat Lal as being the beneficiary of the suit lands as being the legatee of the will made by his father Shri Kanwarlal stood crystallized. 10. The plaintiff Kailash Chand filed Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 for partition of the suit property before the Revenue Court claiming that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to a rightful share in the property by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Succession Act. 11. The present appeal arises from the aforesaid Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 seeking partition which culminated in the impugned judgment dated 2nd November, 2017 passed by the learned Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court. 12. It may be reiterated that the issue regarding title and possession over the suit property stands concluded against Smt. Nandkanwarbai(deceased widow) vide judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 passed in Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958. The said Civil 7Suit was dismissed by the competent Court qua the relief of possession and title while recognizing the right to Smt. Nandkanwarbai only to the extent of receiving maintenance from the estate. Admittedly, Smt. Nandkanwarbai did not challenge the judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 and thus, it attained finality to the extent of possession and title. Apropos, there is no dispute qua the fact that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was never in possession of the suit property. 13. Shri Puneet Jain, learned counsel representing the appellant advanced the following pertinent submissions and urged that the Division Bench erred in law in dismissing the appeal preferred by the appellant affirming the judgment of the learned Single Judge and restoring the judgment and decree of the Revenue Court. (i) That Smt. Nandkanwarbai had no interest, either limited or otherwise, in the suit land which could fructify into absolute ownership under section 14(1) of the Succession Act and the Division Bench erred in treating “Charge over property towards Maintenance” as possession over the property. (ii) It was contended that in order to attract Section 14(1) of the Succession Act, there must be a “Property possessed by the Hindu Women” but in the present case, the suit for 8possession and title filed by Smt. Nandkanwarbai was dismissed and hence she was never in possession, either legal or actual, over the suit property. iii) That the civil suit for title and possession filed by Smt. Nandkanwarbai having been dismissed, the judgment of the civil Court operated as res judicata and hence the relief could not have been granted to her adopted son[Kailash Chand(plaintiff)] in the subsequent partition suit filed in the Revenue Court. iv) While placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Ram Vishal(dead) by LRs. And Others v.

--- JUDGMENT 328 ---
v. Dattu & Ors.2, is ex-facie erroneous as the said 1 (2004) 9 SCC 302 2 (1987) 1 SCC 160 9judgment deals with issues related to properties held by the joint Hindu family having several surviving coparceners and not that of a sole surviving coparcener. He thus, implored the Court to accept the appeal and set aside the impugned judgments. 14. E-converso, Shri Bishwajit Bhattacharya, learned senior advocate representing the respondents, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant and contended that the issue in the present case regarding the ambit of the rights of a female Hindu on the undivided joint Hindu family estate under Section 14(1) of the Succession Act has been settled by this Court in the case of Munni Devi alias Nathi Devi(Dead) Thr LRs & Ors. v. Rajendra alias Lallu Lal(Dead) Thr LRs & Ors.3 He placed reliance on the pertinent observations(reproduced infra) made by this Court in Munni Devi(supra) and implored the Court to dismiss the appeal and affirm the impugned judgments. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 329 ---
At the outset, it may be noted that in so far as the aspect that Smt. Nandkanwarbai(deceased widow) had never been in possession of the suit property is concerned, the same is virtually an admitted position from the record because she never challenged the judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 whereby the suit filed by her for declaration of title and possession was dismissed by the civil Court and she was held only entitled to receive maintenance from the undivided estate. Thus, indisputably neither Smt. Nadkanwarbai nor the plaintiff Kailash Chand were ever in possession of the suit land. 18. In the case of Munni Devi(supra) which was heavily relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent Shri Bhattacharya, 11the admitted position was that Bhonri Devi, widow of Late Dhannalalji was actually residing in the suit property during the time the coparcener Shri Harinarayanji was alive and even after his death, she continued to reside in the said house and used to collect the rents from the tenants who were occupying the suit property till the date of filing of suit. 19. A Bench of two Honourable Judges of this Court after considering the gamut of Section 14 of the Succession Act in the case of Munni Devi(supra) observed as below: - “14. In view of the above, there remains no shadow of doubt that a Hindu woman's right to maintenance was not and is not an empty formality or an illusory claim being conceded as a matter of grace and generosity. It is a tangible right against the property, which flows from the spiritual relationship between the husband and the wife. The said right was recognised and enjoined by pure Shastric Hindu Law, which existed even before the passing of the 1937 or the 1946 Acts. Those Acts merely gave statutory backing recognising the position as was existing under the Shastric Hindu Law. Where a Hindu widow is in possession of the property of her husband or of the husband's HUF, she has a right to be maintained out of the said property. She is entitled to retain the possession of that property in lieu of her right to maintenance. Section 14(1) and the Explanation thereto envisages liberal construction in favour of the females, with the object of advancing and promoting the socio-economic ends sought to be achieved by the said legislation. As explained in V. Tulasamma (supra) case, the words “possessed by” used in Section 14(1) are of the widest possible amplitude and include the state of owning a property, even though the Hindu woman is not in actual or physical possession of the same. Of course, it is equally well settled that the possession of the widow, must be under some vestige of a claim, right or title, because the section does not contemplate the possession of any rank trespasser without any right or title. 1215. The undisputed facts in the instant case are that Dhannalalji, the husband of Bhonri Devi expired in 1936, Ganeshnarayanji, the father-in-law of Bhonri Devi expired in 1938 and Harinarayanji, the brother of Ganeshnarayanji died on 11.11.1953. Daulalji was adopted by Sri Bakshji in the year 1916. Harinarayanji, Ganeshnarayanji and Sri Bakshji had common ancestor Gopalji. It is also not disputed that the suit property was an ancestral property in the hands of Harinarayanji and Ganeshnarayanji. It is also not disputed that Bhonri Devi was staying in the suit property before the death of Harinarayanji, and after his death she was in possession and in charge of the said property, and was maintaining herself by collecting rent from the tenants who were occupying part of the suit property. 16. Now it appears from the documents on record that the rent notes (Exhibit A-2 to A-11) executed during the period 1955 to 1965 in respect of the part of the suit property, were executed in the name of Bhonri Devi. The concerned defendants in the suit had also filed their written statements, stating that they were paying rent to Bhonri Devi only. It further appears from the document (Exhibit A-13) that Daulalji had raised an objection against Bhonri Devi paying the house tax in respect of the suit property and that the Municipal Commissioner, Jaipur vide order dated 28.03.1957 had observed that Bhonri Devi was paying the tax in the past also. An appeal against the said order was preferred by Daulalji before the Administrator of Municipal Council, Jaipur however the same was also rejected vide the order dated 28.01.1959. It was observed therein that “In this case there is a dispute regarding ownership. Municipal Commissioner who is the reversing authority in his judgment dated 28.03.1957 held that Bhonri Devi who was paying tax to the municipality in the past, should pay the tax and for question of title the concerned party should seek remedy in the Civil Courts.” 17. From the said documents it clearly emerges that Bhonri Devi was paying the house tax prior to 1956 and was collecting the rent from the tenants prior to and after 1956. Pertinently from the document Exhibit-54, it emerges that in 1940 Bhonri Devi, when she was staying with her in-laws, had no source of maintenance, and therefore she was granted Rs. 2.50 per month by way of maintenance, by the Punya Department of the Government. She claiming to be a PARDANASHEEN lady had authorised Daulalji to collect the said amount of maintenance. The said document clearly shows that Bhonri Devi was residing in the suit house since 1940. Be that as it may, it was well established that Bhonri devi was in possession of the suit house before and after the death of Harinarayanji in 1953 13and had continued to remain in possession thereafter and was collecting rent from the tenants who were in occupation of part of the suit premises since 1955, till the date of filing of the suit in 1965 by the plaintiff Daulalji. 18. The afore-stated facts and circumstances clearly established that Bhonri devi had long settled possession of the suit property, which she had acquired in lieu of her pre-existing right to maintenance, prior to the commencement of the Act of 1956, which entitled her to become a full owner of the suit property by virtue of Section 14(1) of the said Act. Her exclusive possession of suit property after the death of Harinarayanji in 1953 i.e., prior to coming into force of the said Act in 1956, was not only not disputed but was admitted by the plaintiff Daulalji in the plaint itself. Her pre-existing right to maintenance from the estate of the HUF of her husband was also well established. The submission of Mr. Jain for the appellants that mere right to maintenance would not ipso facto create any charge on the property and that for creating legal charge recognising right of Hindu women to maintenance required execution of a document, device or agreement, cannot be countenanced. Her pre-existing right to maintenance, coupled with her settled legal possession of the property, would be sufficient to create a presumption that she had a vestige of right or claim in the property, though no document was executed or specific charge was created in her favour recognizing her right to maintenance in the property. 19. It may be noted that in the Will executed by Harinarayanji in favour of Daulalji, there was no mention of the suit property. What was stated in the Will was that whatever movable and immovable property, which belonged to Harinarayanji would be devolved upon Daulalji. It was only in the Probate proceedings filed by Daulalji in respect of the said Will, he had shown the suit property in the Schedule. It is true that the objections raised by Bhonri Devi against granting of Probate in favour of Daulalji were not accepted by the Probate Court, and the alleged Will executed by Harinarayanji in favour of Bhonri Devi was also not proved by her in the said proceedings. Nonetheless, in view of her pre-existing right to maintenance from the estate of the HUF of her husband and in view of her exclusive settled possession of the suit property prior to and after the commencement of the Act of 1956, the only conclusion which could be drawn, would be that Bhonri Devi had acquired the suit property in lieu of her pre-existing right to maintenance, and that she had held the suit property as the full owner and not limited owner by virtue of Section 14(1) of the said Act of 1956. 1420. As stated earlier, Hindu woman's right to maintenance is a tangible right against the property which flows from the spiritual relationship between the husband and the wife. Such right was recognized and enjoined under the Shastric Hindu Law, long before the passing of the 1937 and the 1946 Acts. Where a Hindu widow is found to be in exclusive settled legal possession of the HUF property, that itself would create a presumption that such property was earmarked for realization of her pre-existing right of maintenance, more particularly when the surviving co-parcener did not earmark any alternative property for recognizing her pre- existing right of maintenance. The word “possessed by” and “acquired” used in Section 14(1) are of the widest amplitude and include the state of owning a property. It is by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Act of 1956, that the Hindu widow's limited interest gets automatically enlarged into an absolute right, when such property is possessed by her whether acquired before or after the commencement of 1956 Act in lieu of her right to maintenance.” (emphasis supplied) 20. Thus it is clear from the above observations and findings in the case of Munni Devi(supra) that this Court after taking into consideration the pre-existing right of Bhonri Devi to maintenance from the estate of the HUF of her husband and her exclusive settled possession over the suit property concluded that she had acquired the suit property in lieu of her pre-existing right to maintenance and that she had held the suit property as the full owner and not limited owner by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Succession Act. 21. Thus, what we are required to adjudicate in the present case is as to whether in absence of even a semblance of possession either actual or legal over the suit property, plaintiff Kailash Chand 15being the legal heir of Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to institute a Revenue suit for partition of the suit property based on the succession rights of the widow on the joint Hindu family property. In this very context, we would like to gainfully refer to the judgments of this Court which were relied upon by Shri Puneet Jain, learned counsel for the appellant.

--- JUDGMENT 330 ---
22. In the case of Ram Vishal(supra) this Court held as under: - “16. In our view, the authority in Raghubar Singh case [(1998) 6 SCC 314] can be of no assistance to the respondent. As has been held by this Court, a pre-existing right is a sine qua non for conferment of a full ownership under Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act. The Hindu female must not only be possessed of the property but she must have acquired the property. Such acquisition must be either by way of inheritance or devise, or at a partition or “in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance” or by gift or by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription. In the present matter, it is nobody's case that Manki had got possession of the 1/4th share in lieu of maintenance or in arrears of maintenance. It was also not their case that there was a partition of the property and that in such partition, she had been given the property. A mere right of maintenance without actual acquisition in any manner is not sufficient to attract Section 14.” (emphasis supplied) 23. Further, in the case of M. Sivadasan (Dead) through Lrs. and Others v. A. Soudamini (Dead) through Lrs. and Others4, this Court held as under: - “4. This argument of the plaintiff was rejected by the Trial Court and the same was upheld by the First Appellate Court as well as by the Second Appellate Court on the reasoning that after the death of Sami Vaidyar, his son Sukumaran succeeded in the property in year 1942 itself. Thereafter, Sukumaran and later the children succeeding Sukumaran had the right over the 4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1078 16property which undisputedly remained in their possession. Section 14 sub-Section (1) had no application in this case. The essential ingredient of Section 14 sub-Section (1) is possession over the property. Admittedly the plaintiff was never in possession of the property. The possession was always that of the defendant and therefore Section 14 sub- Section (1) would not be applicable. In Ram Vishal (dead) by lrs.

--- JUDGMENT 331 ---
Jagan Nath. reported in (2004) 9 SCC 302 the position of possession being a pre-requisite to sustain a claim under sub- section (1) of Section 14 of the 1956 Act was confirmed in Para 16 which is quoted below: ‘16. In our view, the authority in Raghubar Singh case [(1998) 6 SCC 314] can be of no assistance to the respondent. As has been held by this Court, a pre- existing right is a sine qua non for conferment of a full ownership under Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act. The Hindu female must not only be possessed of the property but she must have acquired the property. Such acquisition must be either by way of inheritance or devise, or at a partition or “in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance” or by gift or by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription…’ 5. As per the law as it existed at their relevant time the property which was an agricultural property would devolve upon the male child and daughters would get only a limited right to maintenance till, they were married and the widow would be entitled to maintenance from the income from the property till her death or remarriage. As per the family Settlement Deed dated 12.03.1938 which was relied upon by both the parties, the property in dispute was specifically allotted to Sami Vaidyar and his only son Sukumaran. Therefore, the widow of Sami Vaidyar i.e., Choyichi will not have any right over the property. The findings of all the courts below were that Choyichi was never in possession of the property and therefore she would not get the right, as claimed by her under Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.” (emphasis supplied) 24. Seen in the light of the ratio of the above judgments, it is clear that for establishing full ownership on the undivided joint family estate under Section 14(1) of the Succession Act the Hindu female 17must not only be possessed of the property but she must have acquired the property and such acquisition must be either by way of inheritance or devise, or at a partition or “in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance” or by gift or be her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription. 25. Even on going through the pleadings in the Revenue suit for partition filed by plaintiff Kailash Chand, it is clear that there is not even a whisper in the plaint that Smt. Nandkanwarbai or the plaintiff Kailash Chand himself were ever in possession of the suit property. As a matter of fact, the suit was filed by pleading that the suit property was a joint Hindu family property and defendant- Mukat Lal(appellant herein) had consented to give half share of the suit property to the plaintiff Kailash Chand on his demand. This assertion was denied by defendant-Mukat Lal. 26. In this context, when we consider the effect of the earlier civil suit instituted by Smt. Nadkanwarbai(deceased widow), it becomes clear that she was never in possession of the suit property because the civil suit was filed by her claiming the relief of title as well as possession and the same was dismissed. This finding of the civil Court was never challenged. Since, Smt. Nadkanwarbai was never in possession of the suit property, as a necessary corollary the 18Revenue suit for partition claiming absolute ownership under Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act could not be maintained by her adopted son, plaintiff Kailash Chand by virtue of inheritance. 27. On close scrutiny of the judgments rendered by the learned Single Judge and the learned Division Bench of the High Court, we find that there is no consideration in these judgments that the predecessor of the plaintiff Kailash Chand or the plaintiff himself were ever in possession of the suit property or had acquired the same in the manner as indicated in the judgment of M. Sivadasan(supra).

--- JUDGMENT 332 ---
The brief facts relevant for our purpose are as follows. The respondent is a joint venture engaged in the execution of works contracts for the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation and makes purchases for this purpose. It claimed refund of excess tax credit 1 Hereinafter ‘the Act’. 1amounting to Rs. 17,10,15,285/- for the 4th quarter of 2015-16 through revised return filed on 31.03.2017 and Rs. 5,44,39,148/- for the 1st quarter of 2017-18 through return filed on 29.03.2019, along with applicable interest under Section 42 of the Act. The appellant did not pay the refund even until 2022, pursuant to which the respondent sent a letter dated 09.11.2022 for the consideration of their refund. The Value Added Tax Officer passed an adjustment order dated 18.11.2022 to adjust the respondent’s claims for refund against dues under default notices dated 30.03.2020, 23.03.2021, 30.03.2021, and 26.03.2022. The respondent then filed a writ petition before the Delhi High Court for quashing the adjustment order and the default notices. 3. By judgment dated 21.09.2023, impugned herein, the High Court quashed the adjustment order and directed refund of Rs. 17,10,15,285/- for the 4th quarter of 2015-16 and Rs. 5,44,39,148/- for the 1st quarter of 2017-18, along with interest as per Section 42 till the date of realisation.2 In respect of the default notices, the High Court gave liberty to the respondent to avail statutory appeal under Section 74 of the Act. 2 WP (C) 2491/2023, judgment dated 21.09.2023 (‘Impugned judgment’). 24. The present appeal is restricted to the issue of quashing the adjustment order. The High Court placed reliance on the Delhi High Court’s judgment in Flipkart India Private Limited v. Value Added Tax Officer, Ward 3003 to summarise the law on refund under Section 38. It held that the department must scrupulously adhere to the time limit for processing and issuing the refunds under Section 38. Whenever the department seeks to obtain necessary information under Section 59 of the Act, it must take steps within the time limit envisaged under the Act. Further, the refund amount can be adjusted only when an enforceable demand in the nature of tax or duty is pending against the assessee. The department does not have any legal right or justification to retain the amount beyond the time limit prescribed under Section 38.4 In the facts of the present case, it was held that the mandate of the Act has not been followed and hence the adjustment order is not maintainable.5 5. We have heard the learned ASG for the department and Mr. Rajesh Jain, learned counsel for the respondent-assessee. The learned ASG has submitted that the timelines specified in Section 3 2023 SCC OnLine Del 5201. 4 Impugned judgment, para 10.

--- JUDGMENT 333 ---
5 ibid, para 11. 338(3) are only to ensure that interest is paid if the refund is delayed beyond the statutorily prescribed period. However, he has argued, the timeline cannot be used to denude the power to adjust refund amounts against outstanding dues under Section 38(2). The refund can be adjusted as long as outstanding dues exist at the time when the refund is processed, even if it is beyond the stipulated timeline. The learned counsel for the assessee has supported the reasoning of the High Court and has placed reliance on several judgments of the Delhi High Court that affirm this position of law.6 6. We find no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment, which follows the view that has been consistently adopted by the High Court.7 The finding of the High Court is based on the plain language of Section 38 of the Act, which reads as follows: “38. Refunds (1) Subject to the other provisions of this section and the rules, the Commissioner shall refund to a person the amount of tax, penalty and interest, if any, paid by such person in excess of the amount due from him. 6 Swarn Darsan Impex v. Commissioner, Value Added Tax, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 4697; Nucleus Marketing and Communication v. Commissioner of Delhi Value Added Tax, 2016 SCC OnLine Del 3941; Rockwell Industries v. Commissioner of Trade and Taxes, 2019 SCC OnLine Del 8432; ITD-ITD CEM JV v. Commissioner of Trade and Taxes, 2019 SCC OnLine Del 9568; Ramky Infrastructure Ltd v. Commissioner of Trade and Taxes, 2023 SCC OnLine Del 4236; Commissioner of Trade and Taxes v. Corsan Corviam Construction S.A. Sadbhav Engineering Ltd JV, 2023 SCC OnLine Del 1900; Flipkart India (supra). 7 ibid. 4(2) Before making any refund, the Commissioner shall first apply such excess towards the recovery of any other amount due under this Act, or under the CST Act, 1956 (74 of 1956). (3) Subject to sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) of this section, any amount remaining after the application referred to in sub-section (2) of this section shall be at the election of the dealer, either – (a) refunded to the person, – (i) within one month after the date on which the return was furnished or claim for the refund was made, if the tax period for the person claiming refund is one month; (ii) within two months after the date on which the return was furnished or claim for the refund was made, if the tax period for the person claiming refund is a quarter; or (b) carried forward to the next tax period as a tax credit in that period. (4) Where the Commissioner has issued a notice to the person under section 58 of this Act advising him that an audit, investigation or inquiry into his business affairs will be undertaken or sought additional information under section 59 of this Act, the amount shall be carried forward to the next tax period as a tax credit in that period. (5) The Commissioner may, as a condition of the payment of a refund, demand security from the person pursuant to the powers conferred in section 25 of this Act within fifteen days from the date on which the return was furnished or claim for the refund was made. (6) The Commissioner shall grant refund within fifteen days from the date the dealer furnishes the security to his satisfaction under sub- section (5). (7) For calculating the period prescribed in clause (a) of sub- section (3), the time taken to – (a) furnish the security under sub-section (5) to the satisfaction of the Commissioner; or (b) furnish the additional information sought under section 59; or (c) furnish returns under section 26 and section 27; or (d) furnish the declaration or certificate forms as required under Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, shall be excluded (8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where – (a) a registered dealer has sold goods to an unregistered person; and (b) the price charged for the goods includes an amount of tax payable under this Act; 5(c) the dealer is seeking the refund of this amount or to apply this amount under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of this section; no amount shall be refunded to the dealer or may be applied by the dealer under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of this section unless the Commissioner is satisfied that the dealer has refunded the amount to the purchaser. (9) Where – (a) a registered dealer has sold goods to another registered dealer; and (b) the price charged for the goods expressly includes an amount of tax payable under this Act, the amount may be refunded to the seller or may be applied by the seller under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of this section and the Commissioner may reassess the buyer to deny the amount of the corresponding tax credit claimed by such buyer, whether or not the seller refunds the amount to the buyer. (10) Where a registered dealer sells goods and the price charged for the goods is expressed not to include an amount of tax payable under this Act the amount may be refunded to the seller or may be applied by the seller under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of this section without the seller being required to refund an amount to the purchaser. (11) Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in sub- section (3) of this section, no refund shall be allowed to a dealer who has not filed any return due under this Act.” 7. Sub-section (1) provides that any amount of tax, penalty and interest that is in excess of the amount due from a person shall be refunded to him by the Commissioner. Sub-section (2) permits the Commissioner to first apply such excess to recover any other amount that is due under the Act or the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. Sub-section (3), which is relevant for our purpose, provides the assessee with the option of getting the refund or carrying it forward to the next tax period as a tax credit. In case of refund, 6Section 38(3)(a) provides the timeline for refund from the date on which the return is furnished or claim for refund is made as: (i) within one month, if the period for refund is one month; (ii) within two months, if the period for refund is a quarter. Sub-section (4) provides that if notice has been issued under Section 58 or additional information has been sought under Section 59, then the amount shall be carried forward to the next tax period as tax credit. Sub-sections (5) and (6) pertain to security. Sub-section (7) provides certain exclusions while calculating the period under sub-section (3). Sub-sections (8)-(10) pertain to refund in cases of sale to registered and unregistered dealers. Lastly, sub-section (11) provides that the refund shall not be allowed to a dealer who has not filed any return that is due under the Act. 8. The language of Section 38(3) is mandatory and the department must adhere to the timeline stipulated therein to fulfil the object of the provision, which is to ensure that refunds are processed and issued in a timely manner. 9. In the present case, Section 38(3)(a)(ii) is relevant as both the refunds in the present case pertain to quarter tax periods. Therefore, as per Section 38(3)(a)(ii), the refund should have been processed within two months from when the returns were filed 7(31.03.2017 and 29.03.2019), which comes up to 31.05.2017 and 29.05.2019. The default notices are dated 30.03.2020, 23.03.2021, 30.03.2021, and 26.03.2022. It is therefore evident that the default notices were issued after the period within which the refund should have been processed. Sub-section (2) only permits adjusting amounts towards recovery that are “due under the Act”. By the time when the refund should have been processed as per the provisions of the Act, the dues under the default notices had not crystallised and the respondent was not liable to pay the same at the time. The appellant-department is therefore not justified in retaining the refund amount beyond the stipulated period and then adjusting the refund amount against the amounts due under default notices that were issued subsequent to the refund period. 10. Further, the learned ASG’s contention that the purpose of the timeline provided under sub-section (3) is only for calculation of interest under Section 428 would defeat the object of the provision. 8 The relevant portion of Section 42 reads: “42. Interest (1) A person entitled to a refund under this Act, shall be entitled to receive, in addition to the refund, simple interest at the annual rate notified by the Government from time to time, computed on a daily basis from the later of – (a) the date that the refund was due to be paid to the person; or (b) the date that the overpaid amount was paid by the person, until the date on which the refund is given. 8Such an interpretation would effectively enable the department to retain refundable amounts for long durations for the purpose of adjusting them on a future date. This would go against the object and purpose of the provision. This contention is hence rejected.

--- JUDGMENT 334 ---
2. This appeal is against the judgment and order of the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack1 dated 10.12.2020, whereby the Writ Appeal No. 435/2020, preferred by the appellants against the judgment and order of the learned Single Judge dated 14.01.2020, has been dismissed and the order of the learned Single Judge has been affirmed. 1 High Court Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 4106/2021 Page 1 of 38Factual Matrix 3. The respondent2 was a Head Constable in Central Reserve Police Force3. He was charge-sheeted on allegations of assaulting and abusing his fellow colleague. In the ensuing enquiry, the charges were found proved against the respondent. As a result thereof, the respondent was compulsorily retired from service vide order dated 16.02.2006. Aggrieved therewith, the respondent filed a departmental appeal, which was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General (P), CRPF vide order dated 28.07.2006. 4. Assailing the order of compulsory retirement and dismissal of his appeal, the respondent filed a Writ Petition (C) No.17398/2006 before a Single Judge Bench of the High Court. The learned Single Judge vide order dated 14.01.2020 allowed the writ petition, inter alia, on the ground that the punishment of compulsory retirement was not one of 2 The original petitioner 3 CRPF Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 2 of 38the punishments specified in Section 11 (1) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 19494. The operative portion of the order of the learned Single Judge is extracted below: “Thus, this court is of the opinion that the award of punishment by the order vide Annexure 5 not only remains bad, but in the circumstances, the consequential order vide Annexure 7 also becomes bad. In such view of the matter and as the Disciplinary Authority is to reconsider the question of punishment, this matter is relegated back to the Disciplinary Authority to hear the question of punishment, giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and pass the final order involving the disciplinary proceeding. For a remand of the matter to the Disciplinary Authority, this court observes, the Disciplinary Authority, while reconsidering the matter will also consider other grounds raised herein. For the setting aside of the order vide Annexure 5 and as the matter is relegated back to the authority, the position of the petitioner before passing of the final order shall be restored and for interference of this court with the order vide Annexures 5 and 7 release of the arrears, if any, involving the petitioner shall be dependent on the ultimate outcome involving fresh disposal of the proceeding by the Disciplinary Authority in terms of the directions of the apex court in paragraph 24 of the judgement in the case of Ranjit Singh versus Union of India as reported in (2006) 4 SCC 153.” 5. Aggrieved with the order of the learned Single Judge, the appellants preferred writ appeal (supra) 4 CRPF Act Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 3 of 38before the Division Bench of the High Court, inter alia, on the following grounds: (i) The charges against the respondent were found proved in the enquiry. They were of serious nature warranting penalty including that of dismissal or removal from service. Compulsory retirement is nothing but a species of removal from service and, therefore, being a lesser penalty than dismissal or removal from service, was an imposable punishment. (ii) Section 11 of the CRPF Act provides that, subject to the rules made under the Act, the Commandant or any other authority or officer, as may be prescribed, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal, anyone or more of the punishments specified therein to any member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty or remissness in the discharge of any Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 4 of 38duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force. Sub-section (1) of Section 18 empowers the Central Government to notify rules for carrying out the purposes of the CRPF Act. Sub-section (2) of Section 18 provides that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may provide for all or any of the matters specified therein, which includes regulating the award of minor punishment under Section 11, and providing for appeals from, or the revision of, orders under that section, or remission of fines imposed under that section. Rule 27 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 19555, specifies the procedure for the award of punishments. Clause (a) of Rule 27 enumerates in a tabular form the punishments which could be imposed and the authority competent to impose such 5 CRPF Rules Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 5 of 38punishments. At serial no.4, under column no.2, in the table, the punishment of compulsory retirement is mentioned as being one of the punishments that may be imposed by the Commandant after a formal departmental enquiry. Thus, in light of the provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF Act read with Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, and by taking into consideration that charges were duly proved in the enquiry, the punishment of compulsory retirement was fully justified. 6. The Division Bench of the High Court, however, found no merit in the writ appeal and dismissed the same accordingly. 7. In these circumstances, the appellants are before this Court questioning the impugned judgment and order of the High Court. 8. We have heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 6 of 38appellants, and Mr. Anand Shankar, learned counsel, appearing for the respondent. Submissions on behalf of the appellants 9.

--- JUDGMENT 335 ---

--- JUDGMENT 336 ---
Mr. Anand Shankar, learned counsel for the respondent, defending the impugned order submitted: (i) Punishment of compulsory retirement as specified in Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules is ultra vires the provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF Act, which is exhaustive, and no punishment beyond what is specified therein can be imposed; (ii) Decision of this Court in Ghulam Mohd. Bhat (supra) is of no help to the appellants as it relates to the punishment of removal from 9 (2005) 13 SCC 228 10 (2016) 13 SCC 71 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 12 of 38service and not compulsory retirement from service; (iii) Rule 27 was framed in exercise of power delegated to the Central Government under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the CRPF Act, which is only to regulate the award of minor punishment not to introduce any other species / kind of punishment. Therefore, a punishment which is not contemplated under the statute cannot be introduced by way of a rule, particularly in absence of specific delegation of power in this regard. Dismissal and compulsory retirement are two different kinds of punishment and cannot be treated as interchangeable. Thus, in absence of any delegation of power to frame rules introducing a new punishment, Rule 27, to the extent it introduces the punishment of compulsory retirement, is ultra vires the CRPF Act; Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 13 of 38(iv) The charge levelled on the original petitioner was not established, as no eye- witness was presented to prove it. Otherwise also, Hawaldar M.

--- JUDGMENT 337 ---
Devnath, who was allegedly assaulted by the original petitioner, was inimical to the original petitioner and made a false complaint. The Disciplinary Authority and the Appellate Authority acted in a mechanical manner. 12. In support of his submissions, Mr. Anand Shankar relied on a decision of this Court in General Officer Commanding-in-Chief & Anr. v. Subash Chandra Yadav & Anr11. 11 (1988) 2 SCC 351 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 14 of 38Issues 13. Having taken note of the rival submissions, the issues that arise for our consideration in this appeal are as follows: (i) Whether the punishment of compulsory retirement from service could have been imposed upon the respondent by relying upon the provisions of Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules? (ii) Whether Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules to the extent it provides for punishments other than those specified in Section 11 of the CRPF Act, ultra vires the CRPF Act and as such inoperable and void? (iii) Whether the punishment of compulsory retirement imposed upon the respondent suffers from any procedural infirmity and / or is shockingly disproportionate to the proven misconduct of the respondent? Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 15 of 38An Overview of the CRPF Act and the Rules 14. Before we address the above issues it would be useful to have an overview of the relevant provisions of the CRPF Act and the rules made thereunder. The CRPF Act is “an Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed Central Reserve Police Force (for short the Force)”. Section 3 provides for constitution of the Force. Sub-section (2) of Section 3 provides that the Force shall be constituted in such manner, and the members of the Force shall receive such pay, pension and other remuneration, as may be prescribed. The word “prescribed” is defined in Section 2 (f) as prescribed by rules made under the Act. Section 812 vests the superintendence, control and administration of the 12 Section 8. Superintendence, Control and Administration of the Force.--- ( 1) The superintendence of, and control over, the Force shall vest in the Central Government; and the Force shall be administered by the Central Government, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and of any rules made there under, through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf. (2) The headquarters of the force shall be at Neemuch or at such other place as may from time to time be specified by the Central Government. (3) While on active duty outside its headquarters, the Force shall be subject to the general control and direction of such authority or officer as may be prescribed or as may be specially appointed by the Central Government in this behalf. Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 16 of 38Force in the Central Government. It declares that the Force shall be administered by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the Act and of any rules made thereunder, through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint in that behalf. Section 9 enumerates “more heinous offences”, whereas Section 10 enumerates “less heinous offences”, both punishable under the Act. For “more heinous offences”, the punishment is of transportation for life or for a term of not less than seven years or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 14 years or with fine which may extend to three months’ pay, or with fine to that extent, in addition to such sentence of transportation or imprisonment. The punishment for “less heinous offences” is imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to three months’ pay or with both. Section 11 deals with minor punishments. According to it, the Commandant or any other authority or Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 17 of 38officer as may be prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under the Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal anyone or more of the punishments specified therein to any member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force. One of the minor punishments specified in Section 11, other than dismissal or suspension, is “removal from any office of distinction or special emolument in the Force”. 15. Section 18 confers rule-making power on the Central Government. Sub-section (1) of Section 18 states that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. Sub-section (2) of Section 18 provides that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters specified therein. Amongst other matters specified therein, clause (d), Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 18 of 38inter alia, empowers the Central Government to make rules for regulating the award of minor punishment under Section 11, and providing for appeals from, or the revision of, orders under that section. 16. An overview of the CRPF Act would make it clear that the Central Government has overall superintendence and control over the Force and the Force is to be administered by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the CRPF Act and of any rules made thereunder through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint. Discussion/ Analysis 17. The rule-making power of the Central Government found in Section 18 is in broad terms. sub-section (1) of Section 18 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the CRPF Act. Rule-making power under sub-section (2) of Section 18 is without prejudice to Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 19 of 38the generality of the power conferred by sub-section (1) thereof. Thus, the Central Government is not only empowered to make rules for regulating the award of minor punishment under Section 11 but also to carry out the purposes of the Act which includes superintendence of, and control over, the Force as well as its administration. Punishment of compulsory retirement is intra vires the CRPF Act 18. Ordinarily a person in service cannot be visited with a punishment not specified in the contract of service or the law governing such service. Punishments may be specified either in the contract of service or in the Act or the rules governing such service. In State Bank of India and Ors. v.

--- JUDGMENT 338 ---
T.J. Paul13 this Court had occasion to deal with a situation where, for a proven charge of gross misconduct, punishment of removal was not one of the punishments specified in the extant rules 13 1999 (4) SCC 759 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 20 of 38though, punishment of dismissal was imposable. This Court set aside the punishment of removal and remitted the matter to the Appellate Authority for considering imposition of one or the other punishment as specified in the extant rules. 19. In the case on hand the CRPF Rules provide for imposition of the punishment of compulsory retirement though the CRPF Act itself does not provide for it in specific terms. Therefore, the argument on behalf of the respondent is that the CRPF Rules are ultra vires the CRPF Act. In support of this submission reliance has been placed on a decision of this Court in Subash Chandra Yadav (supra) where it was observed: “14……. It is well settled that rules framed under the provisions of a statute form part of the statute. In other words, rules have statutory force. But before a rule can have the effect of a statutory provision, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (1) it must conform to the provisions of the statute under which it is framed; and (2) it must also come within the scope and purview of the rule-making power of the authority framing the rule. If either of these two conditions is not fulfilled, the rule so framed would be void.” (Emphasis supplied) Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 21 of 3820. The CRPF Act while dealing with offences and punishments, categorizes offences in two parts. One “more heinous offences” (vide Section 9) and the other “less heinous offences” (vide Section 10). These two categories of offences entail a punishment of imprisonment and/or fine. The usual disciplinary action which befalls on a delinquent employee is envisaged as a minor punishment under Section 11 of the CRPF Act even though many of the punishments specified therein, such as dismissal, reduction in rank and removal from office of distinction, in common service jurisprudence are considered major punishment. That apart, Section 11 which describes minor punishments declares: (a) that the minor punishments specified in Section 11 may be awarded “in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal”; and (b) that the power of the Commandant or any other authority or officer, as may be prescribed, to award the specified Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 22 of 38punishment “is subject to any rules made under the CRPF Act”. Another important feature is that Section 11 does not use common expressions such as “dismissal from service” or “removal from service” while describing the punishments. Though, Rule 27 (vide Table) uses those expressions. 21. The question which would therefore arise for our consideration is whether Section 11 is exhaustive as far as minor punishments imposable under the CRPF Act are concerned or it merely provides for a skeletal framework to be supplemented by the rules framed under the Act. 22.

--- JUDGMENT 339 ---
In Ghulam Mohd. Bhat (supra), a question arose whether punishment of removal from service could be awarded to a Constable in the Force. The argument against the award of punishment of removal from service was that it is not one of the punishments specified in Section 11 of the CRPF Act. The Union of India defended the said punishment on the ground that it is a species of dismissal and is Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 23 of 38permissible under Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules. After examining the provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF Act and Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, this Court observed: “5. A bare perusal of Section 11 shows that it deals with minor punishment as compared to the major punishments prescribed in the preceding section. It lays down that the Commandant or any other authority or officer, as may be prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under the Act, award any one or more of the punishments to any member of the Force who is found guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty or remissness in the discharge of his duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force. According to the High Court the only punishments which can be awarded under this section are reduction in rank, fine, confinement to quarters and removal from any office of distinction or special emolument in the Force. In our opinion, the interpretation is not correct, because the section says that these punishments may be awarded in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal. 6. The use of the words “in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal”, appearing in sub- section (1) of Section 11 before clauses (a) to (e) shows that the authorities mentioned therein are empowered to award punishment of dismissal or suspension to the member of the Force who is found guilty and in addition to, or in lieu thereof, the punishment mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) may also be awarded. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 340 ---
It is fairly well-settled position in law that removal is a form of dismissal. This Court in Dattatraya Mahadev Nadkarni (Dr.) v. Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay [(1992) 2 SCC 547 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 615 : (1992) 20 ATC 275 : AIR 1992 SC 786] explained that removal and Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 24 of 38dismissal from service stand on the same footing and both bring about termination of service though every termination of service does not amount to removal or dismissal. The only difference between the two is that in the case of dismissal the employee is disqualified from future employment while in the case of removal he is not debarred from getting future employment. Therefore, dismissal has more serious consequences in comparison to removal. In any event, Section 11(1) refers to the Rules made under the Act under which action can be taken. Rule 27 is part of the Rules made under the Act. Rule 27 clearly permits removal by the competent authority. In the instant case the Commandant who had passed the order of removal was the competent authority to pass the order.” (Emphasis supplied) 23. The learned counsel for the respondent seeks to distinguish the above decision, inter alia, on the ground that removal may be a species of dismissal or vice versa but compulsory retirement is not, because in common service jurisprudence compulsory retirement is not considered a punishment. Therefore, according to him, Rule 27 prescribes an altogether new punishment which is not contemplated by the CRPF Act. Hence, according to him, Rule 27 to that extent is ultra vires the CRPF Act and as such void. Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 25 of 3824. To determine whether the punishment of compulsory retirement prescribed in Rule 27 is ultra vires the CRPF Act, it would be apposite to first examine the scope of rule-making power conferred on the Central Government by the statute. The CRPF Act, vide sub-section (1) of Section 18, grant the power to make rules in general terms, that is, “to carry out the purposes of this Act”. And, vide sub- section (2) of Section 18, “in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power”, to make rules for all or any of the matters enumerated therein. Interpreting such a rule-making provision, in State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Lakhwinder Kumar and Ors.14, a two-Judge Bench of this Court, relying on a Constitution Bench decision in Rohtak & Hissar Districts Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. & Ors.15, held: “23. In our opinion, when the power is conferred in general and thereafter in respect of enumerated matters, as in the present case, 14 (2013) 6 SCC 333 15 AIR 1966 SC 1471 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 26 of 38the particularization in respect of specified subject is construed as merely illustrative and does not limit the scope of general power. Reference in this connection can be made to a decision of this Court in Rohtak and Hissar Districts Electric Supply Co. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 341 ---
In St. Johns Teachers Training Institute v. Regional Director, National Council for Teacher 16 Dr. Mahachandra Prasad Singh v. Chairman, Bihar Legislative Council & Ors., (2004) 8 SCC 747, para 13 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 27 of 38Education and Anr.17, a three-Judge Bench of this Court observed: “10. …………. The power to make subordinate legislation is derived from the enabling act and it is fundamental that the delegate on whom such a power is conferred has to act within the limits of authority conferred by the Act. Rules cannot be made to supplant the provisions of the enabling act but to supplement it. What is permitted is the delegation of ancillary or subordinate legislative functions, or, what is fictionally called, a power to fill up details. The legislature may, after laying down the legislative policy confer discretion on an administrative agency as to the execution of the policy and leave it to the agency to work out the details within the framework of policy……………….. 12. The question whether any particular legislation suffers from excessive delegation has to be decided having regard to the subject matter, the scheme, the provisions of the statute including its preamble and the facts and circumstances in the background of which the statute is enacted…….It is also well settled that in considering the vires of subordinate legislation one should start with the presumption that it is intra vires and if it is open to two constructions, one of which would make it valid and the other invalid, the courts must adopt that construction which makes it valid and the legislation can also be read down to avoid its being declared ultra vires.” (Emphasis supplied) 26. Francis Bennion in his treatise on Statutory Interpretation (Fifth Edition, page 262, Section 69) has written: 17 (2003) 3 SCC 321 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 28 of 38“There are various types of delegated legislation, but all are subject to certain fundamental factors. Underlying the concept of delegated legislation is the basic principle that the legislature delegates because it cannot directly exert its will in every detail. All it can in practice do is lay down the outline.

--- JUDGMENT 342 ---
This means that the intention of the legislature, as indicated in the outline (that is the enabling Act), must be the prime guide to the meaning of delegated legislation and the extent of the power to make it.” 27. As discussed above, since the rule-making power under Section 18 of the CRPF Act is in broad terms, that is to carry out the purposes of the Act as well as to regulate the award of minor punishment under Section 11, in order to determine whether Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, insofar as it prescribes an additional punishment of compulsory retirement, is intra vires or ultra vires the CRPF Act, we would have to consider: (a) whether the intention of the legislature, as borne out from the provisions of the CRPF Act, was to leave it open for the Central Government to prescribe any other minor punishment than what has already been prescribed Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 29 of 38in Section 11 of the Act; and (b) whether it is in conflict with any of the provisions of the CRPF Act. 28. As regards Section 11 being exhaustive of the minor punishments which could be imposed, the intention of the legislature appears to the contrary. Section 11 expressly uses the phrase “subject to any rules made under this Act” before “award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or more of the following punishments”. Importantly, while prescribing punishment for “more heinous offences” and “less heinous offences” in Sections 9 and 10 respectively, the phrase “subject to any rules made under this Act” is not used. The expression “subject to” conveys the idea of a provision yielding place to another provision or other provisions subject to which it is made18. 18 P.

--- JUDGMENT 343 ---
G.P. Singh in his treatise “Principles of Statutory Interpretation” (13th Edition, Chapter 12 at page 1019, published by LexisNexis) writes: “The delegate cannot override the Act either by exceeding the authority or by making provisions inconsistent with the Act. But when the enabling Act itself permits its modification by rules, the rules made prevail over the provision in the Act. When provision A in the Act is subject to other provisions of the Act, a valid notification issued under any other provision in the Act would in case of conflict with section A override its provisions.” 30. In light of the discussion above, we are of the view that while enacting the CRPF Act the legislative intent was not to declare that only those minor punishments could be imposed as are specified in Section 11 of the CRPF Act. Rather, it was left open for the Central Government to frame rules to carry out the purposes of the Act and the punishments Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 31 of 38imposable were subject to the rules framed under the Act. 31. In that context, one of the purposes of the Act could be gathered from Section 8, which vests the superintendence and control over the Force in the Central Government. The concept of “control”, as per P. Ramantha Aiyer’s Advanced Law Lexicon (4th Edition), inter alia, implies that the controlling authority must be in a position to dominate the affairs of its subordinate19. In State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi20, a Constitution Bench of this Court had occasion to explore the true import of the expression ‘control’ as used in Article 235 of the Constitution of India. After considering the submissions, it was held that the word ‘control’ must include disciplinary jurisdiction. In Madan Mohan Choudhary v. State of Bihar & Ors.21 it was reiterated that the expression ‘control,’ as used in 19 See also Prasar Bharti & Ors. v. Amarjeet Singh & Ors., (2007) 9 SCC 539, paragraph 20 20 AIR 1996 SC 447 21 (1999) 3 SCC 396, paragraphs 25 and 26 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 32 of 38Article 235 of the Constitution, includes disciplinary control. It was also observed that transfers, promotions, and confirmations including transfer of District Judges or the recall of District Judges posted on ex-cadre post or on deputation or on administrative post etc. is also within the administrative control of the High Court. So also, premature and compulsory retirement is within the control of the High Court. 32. From above, it is clear that ‘control’ is a word of wide amplitude and includes disciplinary control. Therefore, in our view, if the CRPF Act envisages vesting of control over the Force in the Central Government and the various punishments imposable under Section 11 are subject to the rules made under the Act, the Central Government in exercise of its general rule-making power, to ensure full and effective control over the Force, can prescribe punishments other than those specified in that Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 33 of 38section, including the punishment of compulsory retirement. 33. It cannot be gainsaid that compulsory retirement is a well-accepted method of removing dead wood from the cadre without affecting his entitlement for retirement benefits, if otherwise payable. It is another form of terminating the service without affecting retirement benefits. Ordinarily, compulsory retirement is not considered a punishment. But if the service rules permit it to be imposed by way of a punishment, subject to an enquiry, so be it. To keep the Force efficient, weeding out undesirable elements therefrom is essential and is a facet of control over the Force, which the Central Government has over the Force by virtue of Section 8 of the CRPF Act. Thus, to ensure effective control over the Force, if rules are framed, in exercise of general rule-making power, prescribing the punishment of compulsory retirement, the same cannot be said to be ultra vires Section 11 of the Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 34 of 38CRPF Act, particularly when sub-section (1) of Section 11 clearly mentions that the power exercisable therein is subject to any rules made under the Act. We, therefore, hold that the punishment of compulsory retirement prescribed by Rule 27 is intra vires the CRPF Act and is one of the punishments imposable. Issues (i) and (ii) are decided in the above terms. Punishment of compulsory retirement suffers from no other infirmity. 34. The charge against the respondent has been that on 18.06.2005, during Forest Camp Training, he abused M. Devnath, Forest Camp Training Haw/ B.H.M. and assaulted him with a stick. M. Devnath was medically examined. The medical examination report confirmed that he suffered injuries. P.K. Sahu (PW-1), who was the Camp Commander, proved that M. Devnath came to him and complained to him about being beaten by the respondent. PW-2, G D Bhukara, initially supported the case against the Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 35 of 38respondent but during cross-examination stated that no third person was present during the incident. PW- 3, T.K. Hajra, stated that M. Devnath had complained to him about the conduct of the respondent, and he could also notice presence of injuries on his body. Similar is the statement of PW-4 Heera Lal Yadav. PW-5 Liyakat Ali, stated that he saw them fighting and saw respondent striking a stick blow to M. Devnath.

--- JUDGMENT 344 ---
After considering the statement of the witnesses, including the victim, and perusing the documents, including the medical report, the charges were found proved. In consequence, after considering the defence of the respondent and the tenure of his service, the Commandant imposed punishment of compulsory Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 36 of 38retirement on the respondent and preserved his right for pension and gratuity. 35. The learned counsel for the respondent made a feeble attempt to challenge the finding returned in the enquiry by claiming that the enquiry officer and the disciplinary authority did not meticulously consider the respondent’s defence and the weaknesses in the evidence led against him. To test the above submission, and to find out whether there is any perversity in the enquiry report, we went through the materials on record and found that there is no such perversity in the enquiry report, which is, in fact, founded on the evidence on record as noticed in the preceding paragraph. Further, no palpable error in the conduct of the enquiry was brought to our notice. The punishment awarded is also not shockingly disproportionate to the proven misconduct. Rather, considering his past service, already a sympathetic view has been taken in the matter and no further latitude need be shown to the Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 37 of 38respondent who was part of a disciplined force and has been found guilty of assaulting his colleague. Consequently, we find no good reason to interfere with the punishment awarded to the respondent. 36. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the High Court is set aside. The writ petition filed by the respondent (original petitioner) shall stand dismissed. The punishment of compulsory retirement awarded to the respondent is affirmed. There is no order as to costs. ….........................................CJI. (DR. D. Y. CHANDRACHUD) …............................................J. (J. B. PARDIWALA) …............................................J. (MANOJ MISRA) New Delhi; May 8, 2024. Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021 Page 38 of 38

--- JUDGMENT 345 ---
1473 of 2021, which was filed by respondent No. 1 herein, for condonation of delay in filing of the 1application for restoration, and seeking thereby to restore the Special Civil Suit No. 269 of 2002, which came to be dismissed for want of prosecution by the trial court on 3rd November 2011. 3. Vide an order dated 24th April 2023, this Court issued notice to the respondents and stayed the proceedings before the trial court. 4. Shorn of details, the facts giving rise to the present appeal are as under: 4.1 The present appeal is concerned with certain lands situated at Sonkhar Village, in Taluka and District Thane, Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “suit land”). There are competing claims with respect to the ownership of the suit land. 4.2 The Government of Maharashtra, through the Special Land Acquisition Officer, Metro Centre, Thane, vide Award Nos. 1 and 2 in the year 1986 and 1988, respectively, acquired the subject land for public purpose, and handed over the said lands for development/execution to City Industrial Development Corporation, Maharashtra (CIDCO). 24.3 In the year 2002, Special Civil Suit No. 269 of 2002 (hereinafter referred to as “subject suit”) was filed by the original plaintiff – Pravin Jamndas Thakkar (Kanani) (since deceased and now represented by his legal heirs respondent Nos. 2 and 3), in the trial court against the Government of Maharashtra (defendant No. 1/respondent No. 4 herein), Special Land Acquisition Officer, Thane (defendant No. 2/respondent No. 5 herein), Vijay Laxman Bhawe (Defendant No.3) (since deceased and now represented through his legal heirs – viz. appellant Nos. 1 and 2 herein), Union of India (defendant No. 4/ respondent No. 6 herein) and City Industrial Development Corporation, Maharashtra (CIDCO) (defendant No. 5/ respondent No. 7 herein) for relief of declaration that the acquisition of suit land is illegal, null and void, and in the alternative, if the court holds that acquisition is good then declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to 12½ % Gaonthan Extension Scheme, in lieu of acquired lands as per the Gaonthan Extension Scheme of CIDCO. 4.4 In the year 2005, the original plaintiff – Pravin Jamndas Thakkar (Kanani) passed away. 34.5 The legal heirs of the original plaintiff, through their Power of Attorney holder, one Mr. Arunkumar Jayantilal Mucchalla, filed an application for condonation of delay in applying for bringing legal heirs of the plaintiff on record, and filed another application for bringing the legal heirs of the plaintiff on record in the subject suit. 4.6 Vide order dated 28th November 2006, the trial court allowed the application for condonation of delay as well as the application for bringing the legal heirs of the plaintiff on record in the subject suit. However, vide order dated 3rd November 2011, the trial court dismissed the subject suit for want of prosecution. 4.7 On 7th November 2019, respondents No. 2 and 3, i.e., the legal heirs of the plaintiff, filed an application, viz., Misc. Civil Application (MCA) No. 1082 of 2019 in the subject suit, seeking condonation of delay of 8 years and 4 days in filing an application for restoration of subject suit. This application is still pending adjudication. 4.8 On 12th October 2021, i.e., during the pendency of the aforesaid application filed by the legal heirs of the plaintiff, respondent No. 1, a private limited company, claiming to be 4the “assignee” from the legal heirs of the plaintiff, filed an application viz., Misc. Civil Application (MCA) No. 1473 of 2021 in the subject suit, seeking condonation of delay of 9 years and 11 months in filing the application for restoration of the subject suit. It was the case of respondent No. 1, that it had entered into an Agreement for Sale dated 8th December 2009, with the legal heirs of the plaintiff, i.e., respondents No. 2 and 3 and agreed to procure benefit arising out of the subject land and in lieu thereof had paid part consideration of Rs. 1.51 crore to the legal heirs of the plaintiff, i.e., respondents No. 2 and 3 alongwith an irrevocable Power of Attorney dated 8th December 2009, thereby appointing respondent No. 1 as their constituted Attorney for doing all such acts, deeds and things to implement the Agreement for Sale. 4.9 Vide order dated 4th May 2022, the trial court allowed the restoration application being MCA No. 1473 of 2021 filed by respondent No.1, subject to the payment of costs of Rs. 15,000/-, thereby condoning the delay of 9 years and 11 months. 4.10 Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the trial court dated 4th May 2022, the appellants filed Civil Revision Application 5No. 269 of 2022 before the High Court. 4.11 The High Court, vide impugned judgment, dismissed the civil revision application filed by the appellants, upheld the order of the trial court and only enhanced the costs awarded from Rs. 15,000/- to Rs. 1,50,000/-. 4.12 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 5. We have heard Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri C.A. Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents. 6. Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the learned trial court has totally erred in entertaining the application filed at the behest of a private party. It is submitted that respondent No.1 is totally a stranger to the proceedings. He submitted that, when an application filed by the legal heirs of the original plaintiff, i.e. respondents No. 2 and 3 herein being MCA No. 1082 of 2019 for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of the subject suit was pending since 7th November 2019, there was no occasion for the learned trial court to have considered the application filed by a stranger subsequently on 12th 6October 2021. 7. Shri Rohatgi further submitted that, as a matter of fact, the subject suit itself is a frivolous one. The suit land belonged to the predecessors of the appellants and it was acquired by the State and the compensation duly received by the appellants. The proceedings for enhancement are also pending before the High Court. It is submitted that entertaining the application at the instance of a stranger for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of a frivolous suit is nothing else but a travesty of justice. It is submitted that, for the same reasons, the judgment of the High Court is also not sustainable.

--- JUDGMENT 346 ---
8. Shri Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the contrary, submitted that respondent No.1 has accrued a right in the lis on account of an Agreement for Sale dated 8th December 2009 entered into between it and the legal heirs of the original plaintiff. It is submitted that, since respondents No.2 and 3 were not prosecuting the application for condonation of delay in filing the application for restoration of the subject suit, respondent No.1 was justified in filing such an application. It is submitted 7that, in any case, no interference is warranted in the concurrent orders of the trial court and the High Court. 9. We find that the approach of the trial court in entertaining the application filed at the behest of respondent No.1 is totally unsustainable in law. The claim of respondent No.1 is on an unregistered Agreement for Sale dated 8th December 2009. We do not wish to comment anything upon the said Agreement for Sale inasmuch as the same may prejudice the rights of the parties. However, entertaining an application filed at the behest of a stranger for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of the subject suit is totally unsustainable in law. Admittedly, respondent No.1 has not even been impleaded in the subject suit. As such, the application filed at the behest of the stranger, who is not a party to the proceedings, is totally illegal. If the approach as adopted by the trial court is approved, any Tom, Dick and Harry would be permitted to move an application for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of the suit even if he is not a party to the subject suit. 10. Apart from that, an application for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of the subject suit at the 8behest of the legal heirs of the original plaintiff is very much pending since 7th November 2019. It is difficult to understand as to what was the compelling necessity for the trial court to have entertained the application filed at the behest of respondent No.1 after a period of two years from the date of filing of the application by respondents No.2 and 3. The trial court could have very well decided the application filed by respondents No.2 and 3 on its own merits in accordance with law. We do not appreciate the propriety in keeping the application filed by the legal heirs of the original plaintiff in 2019 pending and deciding the subsequent application filed by respondent No.1 in October 2021 within a period of six months. We do not wish to say anything more on it. 11. Though, it was urged by the appellants before the High Court that respondent No.1 was totally a stranger and the reasons given for condonation of delay did not constitute the “sufficient cause”, and though the judgments of this Court were relied upon to contend as to why the application ought not to have been allowed by the trial court, the High Court has totally ignored the same. 912. In light of the view taken by us, though it is not necessary for us to consider in detail as to whether the reasoning given by the trial court and the High Court as to whether respondent No.1 had made out a “sufficient cause” for condonation of delay is correct or not, we are of the prima facie view that the reasoning given by the trial court as well as the High Court for condoning such an inordinate delay will not come under the ambit of “sufficient cause” as has been delineated by this Court in a catena of judgments. 13. We find that the order of the trial court as well as the High Court are not sustainable in law. The appeal is therefore allowed. The judgment dated 14th December 2022, passed by the High Court in Civil Revision Application No. 269 of 2022, and the order dated 4th May 2022, passed by the trial court in Civil Misc. Application No. 1473 of 2021 are quashed and set aside. 14. However, we clarify that the application filed by respondents No.2 and 3 being MCA No. 1082 of 2019 would be considered by the trial court on its own merits in accordance with law. 1015. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No costs.

--- JUDGMENT 347 ---
2024 INSC 388 Non-Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4702 OF 2023 National Highways Authority of India … Appellant Versus M/s Hindustan Construction Company Ltd. … Respondent with CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4703 OF 2023 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4704 OF 2023 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4705 OF 2023 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4706 OF 2023 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4707 OF 2023 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4708 OF 2023 and CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4709 OF 2023 J U D G M E N T ABHAY S. OKA, J. FACTUAL ASPECTS IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4702 OF 2023 1. The appellant- National Highways Authority of India Ltd. has been constituted under Section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988. On 2nd June 2004, the appellant awarded a contract to the respondent for the work of the Allahabad Bypass Project, which involved the construction of a road from km 158 to km 198 (except a bridge on the river). The total cost of the project was Rs.4,46,99,12,839/-. A dispute Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 1 of 15between the parties was referred to the Dispute Resolution Board. The Board gave its recommendations. Ultimately, the dispute was referred to an Arbitral Tribunal of three arbitrators. There were three claims referred to arbitration, which are as follows: • Claim no.1 - Reimbursement of additional expenditure incurred due to an increase in the rates of royalty and associated sales tax on soil, sand and crushed stone aggregates; • Claim no.2 - Non-payment for executed work of embankment with soil/pond ash for the initial 150 mm depth stripped in accordance with the requirements of the contract and • Claim no.3 - Reimbursement of additional costs incurred due to an increase in the forest transit fee rates. 2. The Arbitral Tribunal made an award on 30th March 2010. The summary of the award is as follows: • Claim no.1 – The Arbitral Tribunal granted an amount of Rs.2,69,91,248/- as an additional cost to the respondent till 31st December 2008, along with interest and future interest of 12% per annum. A direction was also issued to the appellant to pay an additional cost to the respondent post-31st December 2008 on account of an increase in royalty charges and associated sales tax; Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 2 of 15• Claim no. 2 - Two members of the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of three members held that the respondent was entitled to Rs.3,47,35,522/- towards the formation of the embankment for an initial 150 mm, along with a price adjustment on the said amount in accordance with clause 70.3 of the contract, with interest and future interest at 12% per annum. The third member of the Arbitral Tribunal dissented and held that the respondent was not entitled to any amount under the said claim. • Claim no.3 - The respondent was granted Rs.3,77,74,427.39/- along with interest and future interest at 12% per annum. 3. Being aggrieved by the award, the appellant filed a petition under section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short ‘the Arbitration Act’). By the impugned judgment and order dated 30th November 2011, the learned Single Judge confirmed the award in respect of Claim no.1 and Claim no.3, relying upon the decision of the High Court in the case of National Highways Authority of India v. M/s. ITD Cementation India Limited1. Regarding Claim no.2, the learned Single Judge held that the award was a majority decision of the Arbitral Tribunal based on an analysis of the material placed before the Arbitral Tribunal. Therefore, the 1 2008 (100) DRJ 431 Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 3 of 15award for Claim no.2 was upheld. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order, the appellant preferred an appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act before a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. By the impugned judgment, the said appeal has been dismissed. From the impugned judgment, it appears that the submissions made before the Division Bench of Delhi High Court were confined to Claim nos. 1 and 2. By the impugned judgment, the appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed. Being aggrieved by the Arbitral Tribunal’s award and the judgments of the High Court, the appellant has preferred the present appeal. At the outset, we may note here that one of the grounds of challenge in the present appeal was that the decision of the High Court in the case of National Highways Authority of India v. M/s. ITD Cementation India Limited1 was the subject matter of challenge before this Court. We may state that by judgment and order dated 24th April 20152, the said appeal has been partly allowed by setting aside the award made on claim no.8.

--- JUDGMENT 348 ---
SUBMISSIONS 4. The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant pointed out that an increase in the rates of royalty on soil, sand and crushed stones which aggregates through a notification, would be adjusted as per sub-clause 70.3 (vii) of the contract, which provides for a price adjustment for all local material based on Wholesale Price Index (WPI). The learned counsel submitted that while submitting the bid, the appellant 2 (2015) 14 SCC 21 Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 4 of 15accepted that WPI would be the only yardstick to be used in the matter of price adjustment. The learned counsel submitted that the Division Bench erroneously interpreted clause 70.8 of the agreement. 5. The learned senior counsel submitted that though the contract provided for partly fixed and partly adjustable prices, the adjustment in costs for inputs would be covered only to the extent to which they are covered by a formula in clause no. 70.3 of the agreement. She submits that the learned Single Judge and Division Bench of the High Court have failed to notice that clause 70.8 starts with a non-obstante clause. It provides that such additional or reduced costs shall not be separately paid or credited if the same has already been taken into consideration in the indexing of any inputs to the price adjustment formulae in accordance with clauses 70.1 to 70.7. She submits that in the present case, such additional costs have been dealt with in Clause 70.3 (vii). She submitted that the sales tax was not increased based on legislation. The learned senior counsel submitted that the work of embankment construction is a part of the work of clearing and grubbing, which includes backfilling up to 150 mm. She submitted that when topsoil is removed as it is unfit for construction, this activity has to be a part of clearing and grubbing. On facts, she submitted that no evidence had been placed on record to show that the Engineer had required the respondent to remove the top 150 mm of soil in all places. She submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal and the Courts must strictly interpret the contract. Just because the respondent has Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 5 of 15incurred some expenditure, it would not amount to a liability on the appellant which is covered by clause 70.8 of the agreement. She has pointed out the factual aspects of the connecting cases.

--- JUDGMENT 349 ---
6. The learned counsel representing the respondents in the appeals pointed out that the scope of interference in a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is narrow, and the jurisdiction of the Appellate Court under Section 37 is still narrower. The learned counsel pointed out that the impugned judgments relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of the National Highways Authority of India v. M/s. ITD Cementation India Limited1. He submitted that the said decision had been upheld by this Court by judgment and order dated 24th April 20152 in Civil Appeal no. 9799 of 2010 and other connected cases. The submission is that the decision of this Court completely covers the respondent's claims nos. 1 and 3. The learned counsel invited our attention to the majority view of the Arbitral Tribunal on the claim regarding expenses incurred for making an embankment. It was submitted that the view taken by the majority is the view of the experts, which does not call for any interference. CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 7. We may note here that the impugned judgments in all connected appeals are based on the impugned judgment in Civil Appeal no. 4702 of 2023. In this case, we are dealing with concurrent findings arrived at by the Arbitral Tribunal, the learned Single Judge in a petition under Section 34 of the Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 6 of 15Arbitration Act, and the Division Bench in appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act. In this case, we are concerned with the construction of the terms of a contract between the parties. In the case of Parsa Kente Collieries Ltd. v. Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd.3, in paragraphs 9.1 and 9.2, this Court held thus: “9.1. In Associate Builders [Associate Builders v. DDA, (2015) 3 SCC 49 : (2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 204], this Court had an occasion to consider in detail the jurisdiction of the Court to interfere with the award passed by the Arbitrator in exercise of powers under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. In the aforesaid decision, this Court has considered the limits of power of the Court to interfere with the arbitral award. It is observed and held that only when the award is in conflict with the public policy in India, the Court would be justified in interfering with the arbitral award. In the aforesaid decision, this Court considered different heads of “public policy in India” which, inter alia, includes patent illegality. After referring Section 28(3) of the Arbitration Act and after considering the decisions of this Court in McDermott International Inc.

--- JUDGMENT 350 ---
v. Dewan Chand Ram Saran, (2012) 5 SCC 306] , SCC paras 43-45, it is observed and held that an Arbitral Tribunal must decide in accordance with the terms of the contract, but if an Arbitrator construes a term of the contract in a reasonable manner, it will not mean that the award can be set aside on this ground. It is further observed and held that construction of the terms of a contract is primarily for an Arbitrator to decide unless the Arbitrator construes the contract in such a way that it could be said to be something that no fair- minded or reasonable person could do. It is further observed by this Court in the aforesaid decision in para 33 that when a court is applying the “public policy” test to an arbitration award, it does not act as a court of appeal and consequently errors of fact cannot be corrected. A possible view by the Arbitrator on facts has necessarily to pass muster as the Arbitrator is the ultimate master of the quantity and quality of evidence to be relied upon when he delivers his arbitral award. It is further observed that thus an award based on little evidence or on evidence which does not measure up in quality to a trained legal mind would not be held to be invalid on this score. 9.2. Similar is the view taken by this Court in NHAI v. ITD Cementation (India) Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 8 of 15Ltd. [NHAI v. ITD Cementation (India) Ltd., (2015) 14 SCC 21 : (2016) 2 SCC (Civ) 716] , SCC para 25 and SAIL v. Gupta Brother Steel Tubes Ltd. [SAIL v. Gupta Brother Steel Tubes Ltd., (2009) 10 SCC 63 : (2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 16] , SCC para 29. (underline supplied) 8. This Court laid down the law regarding the scope of interference in a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act in the case of MMTC Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 351 ---
Vedanta Ltd.4. Paragraph 11 reads thus: “11. As far as Section 34 is concerned, the position is well-settled by now that the Court does not sit in appeal over the arbitral award and may interfere on merits on the limited ground provided under Section 34(2)(b)(ii) i.e. if the award is against the public policy of India. As per the legal position clarified through decisions of this Court prior to the amendments to the 1996 Act in 2015, a violation of Indian public policy, in turn, includes a violation of the fundamental policy of Indian law, a violation of the interest of India, conflict with justice or morality, and the existence of patent illegality in the arbitral award. Additionally, the concept of the “fundamental policy of Indian law” would cover compliance with statutes and judicial precedents, adopting a judicial approach, compliance with the principles of natural justice, and Wednesbury [Associated Provincial Picture Houses v. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA)] reasonableness. 4 (2019) 4 SCC 163 Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 9 of 15Furthermore, “patent illegality” itself has been held to mean contravention of the substantive law of India, contravention of the 1996 Act, and contravention of the terms of the contract.” (emphasis added) 9. This Court, in the case of UHL Power Company Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 352 ---
v. State of Himachal Pradesh5 held that the jurisdiction of the Court under Section 34 is relatively narrow and the jurisdiction of the Appellate Court under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act is all the more circumscribed. In the light of the limited scope for interference under Section 37 appeal, we will have to deal with the submissions. 10. We have carefully perused the material part of the award of the Arbitral Tribunal and the impugned judgments. For convenience, we refer to the impugned judgment in Civil Appeal no. 4702 of 2023. As can be seen from the impugned judgment, the present appellant confined the challenge only to two issues, which are set out in paragraph 2 of the impugned judgment. “2. Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that there are two aspects, which are required to be examined in the present appeal: i) The allowing of the claims of the respondent on account of increase in royalty, sales tax and in the forest transit fee, stated to have been imposed by subsequent legislations; 5 (2022) 4 SCC 116 Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 10 of 15ii) The allowing of the claim for balance amount for construction of embankment which according to the appellant, formed a part of the activity of clearing and grubbing and was not payable as embankment work.” 11. The Division Bench held that the imposition of a tax or upward revision of an already existing tax or levy through subsequent legislation is admittedly akin to the levy of additional royalty. The Division Bench relied upon a decision of the same Court in the case of the National Highways Authority of India v. M/s. ITD Cementation India Limited1. The Division Bench in the impugned judgment held that the claim made on account of the increase in royalty, sales tax, forest transit fee, etc., was covered in favour of the respondent by the said decision. As stated earlier, the decision in the case of the National Highways Authority of India v. M/s. ITD Cementation India Limited1 was confirmed by this Court by judgment dated 24th April 20152 with a partial modification. A perusal of the said judgment shows that the issue therein was also regarding a claim based on an upward revision of royalty. Clauses 70 to 70.8 of the agreement quoted in the judgment are identical to those in the agreement subject matter of these appeals. The argument before this Court was also the same that the WPI assessment would include a claim for enhanced royalty. In paragraph 21 of the decision, this Court dealt with the impact of clauses 70.1 to 70.7 and 70.8. In paragraph 21 of the said decision, this Court held thus : Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 11 of 15“26. We now turn to the reasoning given by the Arbitral Tribunal in paras 21 to 23 of the award, as quoted above. The award considers the impact of sub-clauses 70.1 to 70.7 and agrees with the contention that the provision for cost escalation based on the agreed price adjustment formulae falls in one compartment while the compensation for additional cost resulting from a subsequent legislation falls in a separate category. In other words, the contention that stands accepted was, that the escalation in price premised on fluctuation in market value of the inputs stands on one footing, while the additional cost resulting from the impact of any statute, decree, ordinance, law etc as referred to in sub-clause 70.8 stands on the other. Resultantly the governing clauses in the instant case were held not to be sub-clauses 70.1 to 70.7 but the substantive part of sub-clause 70.8. The award also considered whether minor minerals in question were or were not included in the basket of materials whose cost variation was taken into account as an input while arriving at WPI. It also considered that the WPI is an index applicable uniformly in all states while the increase 2 Page 30 in Seigniorage Fee would vary from state to state. It further dealt with the aspect that NHAI itself was of the opinion that the additional impact as a result of subsequent legislation was admissible separately, as signified by the letter dated 03.09.2003 to the Economic Advisor. In the backdrop of the law laid down by this court, the construction of the terms of the contract by the Arbitral Tribunal is completely Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 12 of 15consistent with the principles laid down by this court. Upon construing the terms and the material on record it concluded that the instant matter would be covered by substantive part of Sub-Clause 70.8 of COPA. It also noted that NHAI itself was of such opinion. The view so taken by the Arbitral Tribunal after considering the material on record and the terms of the contract is certainly a possible view, to say the least. We do not see any reason to interfere. The Division Bench in our considered view, was completely right and justified in dismissing the challenge.” (emphasis added) 12. There was some controversy before the Division Bench on the issue whether there was an actual increase in the sales tax. However, after perusing the circular dated 1st December 2004, the Division Bench concluded that there was an addition of 3% in the amount of sales tax, as a result of which applicable sales tax increased from 22% to 25%. In the light of the law laid down by this Court in the case of National Highways Authority of India2, the contention based on the first claim made by the respondent has no merit.

--- JUDGMENT 353 ---
13. Now, we turn to the issue of whether the claim for the construction of embankment forms part of the activity of clearing and grubbing and was not payable as embankment work. We may note here that two expert members of the Arbitral Tribunal held in favour of the respondent on this point, whereas the third member dissented. There cannot be any Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 13 of 15dispute that as far as the construction of the terms of a contract is concerned, it is for the Arbitral Tribunal to adjudicate upon. If, after considering the material on record, the Arbitral Tribunal takes a particular view on the interpretation of the contract, the Court under Section 34 does not sit in appeal over the findings of the arbitrator. The Division Bench has adverted to the findings recorded by the two members of the Arbitral Tribunal. After considering the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal, the High Court observed that the real controversy was whether the work of backfilling had been done and whether the said work was liable to be excluded from the work of the embankment construction by the respondent. The Division Bench held that nothing is shown that indicates that the construction of the embankment can be said to have been done in a manner where the lower part of the embankment is made only by carrying out the activity of backfilling. The High Court also noted that the appellant sought to make deductions after initially paying the amounts for the embankment. The Division Bench was right in holding that the majority opinion of technical persons need not be subjected to a relook, especially when the learned Single Judge had also agreed with the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal. We have also perused the findings of the majority in the Award. We find nothing perverse or illegal about it. 14. In our view, the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court have examined the challenge to the award within four corners of limitation imposed by Sections 34 Civil Appeal no.4702 of 2023 etc. Page 14 of 15and 37 of the Arbitration Act. The view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal, the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench cannot be found fault with. 15. Therefore, we find no merit in the appeals, and they are dismissed with no order as to costs. ….…………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 354 ---
4 The respondents before this Court are the original accused Nos 1 and 2 respectively. Out of the five accused persons, two were named in the FIR, 1 “IPC” 1SLPR 2653-54/2016 whereas three were not named. The respondents herein ultimately were put to trial for the offence punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 329, 384, 387, 427, 506(2), 323 and 325 respectively of the IPC and Section 135 of the Bombay Police Act. 5 The respondents herein came to be convicted by the Sessions Court for the offence punishable under Section 325 of the IPC and were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment of five years with fine of Rs 5,000/- each. The trial court also convicted the respondents for the offence punishable under Section 323 of the IPC and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year and for the offence punishable under Section 135 of the Gujarat Police Act, they came to be sentenced with rigorous imprisonment of one year with fine of Rs 1,000/-. 6 The original accused Nos 3, 4, and 5, who were not named in the FIR came to be acquitted by the trial court. 7 Against the judgment and order of conviction passed by the trial court, the respondents herein went in appeal before the High Court. 8 The two captioned appeals before this Court originate from Criminal Appeal (For Enhancement) No 906 of 2014 and Criminal Appeal No 1330 of 2014 decided by the High Court. 9 These two appeals, i.e. Criminal Appeal Nos 906 of 2014 and 1330 of 2014 respectively came to be preferred by the appellant herein, one for enhancement of sentence and the connected appeal against the order of acquittal so far as the original accused Nos 3 to 5 are concerned. It may not 2SLPR 2653-54/2016 be out of place to state at this stage that the respondents as original convicts also preferred Criminal Appeal Nos 723 of 2014 and 733 of 2014 respectively against the order of conviction and sentence. 10 The High Court heard in all five appeals, two filed by the appellant herein, two filed by the respondents and the fifth appeal was filed by the State of Gujarat. The acquittal appeal filed by the State of Gujarat was against the original accused Nos 3 to 5. The High Court disposed of all the five appeals by a common judgment. The operative part of the judgment and order passed by the High Court reads thus: “(a) The impugned judgment and order dated 31.05.2014 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Surendranagar in Sessions Case No.14/2013 is modified only to the extent that sentence imposed upon both original accused no.1 & 2 for conviction u/s.325 IPC is reduced from Five Years to Four Years, without disturbing the order regarding fine and default sentence. Rest of the impugned judgment and order remains unaltered. (b) Considering the principle rendered by Apex Court in Ankush Shivaji Gaikwad v.

--- JUDGMENT 355 ---
State of Maharashtra, 2013 (6) SCC 770 and the request made by learned counsel Mr. Hriday Buch that both Rs.2.50 lacs each, totalling Rs.5.00 Lacs (Rupees Five Lacs only), to the victim under the provisions of Section 357 CrPC, we do not find any reasons in the facts and circumstances of the case for denying the said benefit in favour of both accused no.1 & 2. (c) Accordingly, while granting benefit of the judgment rendered in Ankush Shivaji Gaikwad’s case (supra) to original accused no.1 & 2, it is directed that if both accused no.1 & 2 deposit a sum of Rs.2.50 lacs each, totalling Rs.5.00 Lacs (Rupees Five lacs only), before the Registry of the concerned Sessions Court, within a period of TEN WEEKS from today, which, in turn, shall be paid as compensation to the victim, then both accused no.1 & 2 are not required to undergo the remainder sentence imposed upon them, which has been modified by this Court as aforesaid. On such deposit being made, the Registry of concerned Sessions Court shall pay the entire 3SLPR 2653-54/2016 amount to the victim, after due verification. It is clarified that if any one or both the accused persons fail to deposit the amount as aforesaid, they shall surrender to custody on expiry of the aforesaid period failing which the investigating agency shall take necessary steps for sending them to jail custody. The impugned judgment and order stands modified accordingly.” 11 Thus, it appears that the sentence of five years’ imprisonment as imposed by the trial court came to be reduced to four years. The High Court further held that if an amount of Rs 2.50 lakh is paid by each of the two respondents before it, then the respondents need not undergo even the four years’ of sentence as reduced by the High Court. 12 In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant (original complainant) is before this Court with the present appeals. 13 Mr Harin P Raval, the learned senior counsel appearing for the complainant vehemently submitted that what has been done by the High Court is something impermissible in law. The amount of compensation which is awarded to the victim has nothing to do with the substantive order of sentence which the court imposes upon holding the accused guilty of the alleged offence. According to Mr Raval, the High Court having reduced the sentence of five years as imposed by the trial court to four years could not have further modified the order of sentence on the premise that the respondents are ready and willing to pay an amount of Rs 5 lakh by way of compensation to the victim. He further submitted that the reliance placed by the High Court on the decision of this Court in the case of Ankush Shivaji Gaikwad vs State of Maharashtra2, is completely misplaced. 2 (2013) 6 SCC 770 4SLPR 2653-54/2016 14 In such circumstances referred to above, Mr Raval prayed that the impugned judgment of the High Court be set aside and the respondents be asked to undergo sentence of four years’ rigorous imprisonment. 15 On the other hand, these appeals have been vehemently opposed by Mr Purvish Malkan, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents (original accused persons). He would submit that no error much less an error of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order. He also submitted that it’s been now twelve years since the incident had occurred. He also submitted that the amount of Rs 5 lakh has been deposited before the trial court. 16 In such circumstances referred to above, he prayed that there being no merit in these appeals, the same may be dismissed. ANALYSIS 17 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the procedure adopted by the High Court, as reflected in paragraph 19 of the operative part of the order, could be said to be in accordance with law. 18 Section 357of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads thus: “357. Order to pay compensation.—(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when 5SLPR 2653-54/2016 passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied— (a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution; (b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a civil court; (c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of another person or of having abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting to them from such death; (d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto. (2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal. (3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so sentenced. (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision. (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this section.” 6SLPR 2653-54/2016 19 Way back in 1981, this Court speaking through Krishna Iyer, J. in Maru Ram vs Union of India & Others3, held that while social responsibility of the criminal to restore the loss or heal the injury is part of the punitive exercise; the length of the prison term is no reparation to the crippled or bereaved and is futility compounded with cruelty. Section 357 provides power to award compensation to victims of the offence out of the sentence of fine imposed on accused. Time and again this Court has reiterated that it is an important provision but courts seldom invoke the same. It empowers the court to award compensation to victims while passing judgment of conviction. In addition to conviction, the court may order the accused to pay some amount by way of compensation to victim who has suffered by the action of accused. 20 In Hari Singh vs Sukhbir Singh and Others4, this Court held that the power to award compensation under Section 357 of the CrPC is not ancillary to other sentences, but it is in addition thereto. This power was intended to do something to reassure the victim that he or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system.

--- JUDGMENT 356 ---
As observed in Hari Singh (supra), it is a measure of responding appropriately to crime as well as of reconciling the victim with the offender. It is, a constructive approach to crimes. 21 The High Court having upheld the conviction for the offence punishable under Section 325 of the IPC so far as the two respondents herein are concerned and having reduced the sentence from five years rigorous imprisonment to four years rigorous imprisonment could not have further diluted the order of sentence by asking the accused persons to pay 3 (1981) 1 SCC 107 4(1988) 4 SCC 551 7SLPR 2653-54/2016 compensation. In other words, the High Court having once affirmed the conviction and awarded sentence of four years could not have further in lieu of the same reduced it by ordering compensation. To this extent, we have no hesitation in holding that the High Court fell into error. 22 The idea of victim compensation is based on the theory of victimology which recognizes the harsh reality that victims are unfortunately the forgotten people in the criminal justice delivery system. Victims are the worst sufferers. Victims‟ family is ruined particularly in cases of death and grievous bodily injuries. This is apart from the factors like loss of reputation, humiliation, etc. Theory of Victimology seeks to redress the same and underscores the importance for criminal justice administration system to take into consideration the effect of the offence on the victim's family even though human life cannot be restored but then monetary compensation will at least provide some solace. 23 The provision of Section 357 recognizes the aforesaid and is victim centric in nature. It has nothing to do with the convict or the sentence passed.

--- JUDGMENT 357 ---
The spotlight is on the victim only. The object of victim compensation is to rehabilitate those who have suffered any loss or injury by the offence which has been committed. Payment of victim compensation cannot be a consideration or a ground for reducing the sentence imposed upon the accused as victim compensation is not a punitive measure and only restitutory in nature and thus, has no bearing with the sentence that has been passed which is punitive in nature. 8SLPR 2653-54/2016 24 The words “any loss or injury” used in Section 357 of the CrPC clearly indicates that the sole factor for deciding the compensation to be paid is the victim’s loss or injury as a result of the offence, and has nothing to do with the sentence that has been passed. Section 357 of CrPC is intended to reassure the victim that he/she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system. It is a constructive approach to crimes based on the premise that mere punishment of the offender may not give solace to the victim or its family. 25 As such, when deciding the compensation which is to be paid to a victim, the only factor that the court may take into consideration is the convict’s capacity to pay the compensation and not the sentence that has been imposed. In criminal proceedings the courts should not conflate sentence with compensation to victims. Sentences such as imprisonment and / or fine are imposed independently of any victim compensation and thus, the two stand on a completely different footing, either of them cannot vary the other. Where an accused is directed to pay compensation to victims, the same is not meant as punishment or atonement of the convict but rather as a step towards reparation to the victims who have suffered from the offence committed by the convict. 26 If payment of compensation becomes a consideration for reducing sentence, then the same will have a catastrophic effect on the criminal justice administration. It will result in criminals with a purse full of money to buy their way out of justice, defeating the very purpose of criminal proceedings. 9SLPR 2653-54/2016 27 Having held so as above, the last question that falls for our consideration is how do we modify the order of the High Court. According to Mr Raval that part of the High Court’s order be set aside and the respondents be directed to undergo sentence of four years’ rigorous imprisonment. 28 We could have easily done as submitted by Mr Raval, but in the facts and circumstances of the case, more particularly, keeping in mind that a period of twelve years has elapsed and when the respondents (original convicts) have already deposited the amount of Rs 5 lakh, we are not inclined to direct the respondents to undergo further sentence of four years. However, having said so, we direct each of the respondents to deposit a further sum of Rs 5 lakh, i.e. in all Rs 10 lakh, in addition to what they have already deposited before the trial court. This deposit shall be made within a period of eight weeks from today. The trial court shall disburse the entire amount of Rs 15 lakh to the appellant herein (original complainant) after proper identification. 29 With the aforesaid, the appeals are disposed of.

--- JUDGMENT 358 ---
3.1 The Trial Court in C.C. No.5 of 2008 after holding the Petitioner/B. Kanagarajan guilty of offence under Sections 120-B, read with Section 420 IPC and Section 420 IPC sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 5 years and to pay a fine of ₹ 5,000/-, in default to undergo 3 months simple imprisonment. The judgment of sentence as awarded by the Trial Court was upheld by the High Court in Criminal Appeal (MD) No.386 of 2016. 1 High Court of Judicature at Madras, Bench at Madurai 2 II Additional District Judge for CBI Cases, Madurai Page 2 of 74. The proceedings arise out of common FIR No. RC MA1 2004 A 0061 dated 27.09.2004 registered by Central Bureau of Investigation (C.B.I.) under Section 120-B, read with Sections 420, 477(A) of IPC and Section 13(2), read with Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act,1988 at Chennai. It is a case in which fraudulent transactions were made by the accused in connivance with the officers working at that time in Indian Bank at Srirangam Branch, Trichy. 5. The petitioner in SLP(Crl.) No.3787 of 2024 is proprietor of M/s Kumaran Silks whereas the petitioner in SLP(Crl.) No.3788 of 2024 is the partner in M/s Sri Ganesh Godown. In the FIR, there are total 14 accused out of which 4 are bank officials and 10 are private businessmen.

--- JUDGMENT 359 ---
6. The allegations against the accused were that the bank officers had made certain unauthorised debits in external clearing account and local drafts accounts and the said amount were credited to different parties accounts to offset the unauthorised temporary Demand Overdraft allowed earlier. The transactions were done in September 2002. The result was interest free advance to the petitioners. Inspection was carried out by the senior officers of the bank on 09.01.2004. It was noticed that certain debit entries were made in the external clearing account and credited in the accounts of the Page 3 of 7petitioner. These could be made only if any negotiable instrument is submitted for clearing. In the case in hand, there was no instrument submitted. Even the temporary overdraft granted to the parties was not reported to the head office. After the inspection, the fraudulent entries were pointed out on 09.01.2004 to the tune of ₹ 1,10,66,100/- (Rupees one crore ten lakhs sixty-six thousand and one hundred only) in the case of 10 borrowers including the petitioners. Immediately on the next date, the payment got deposited by the manager of the bank. It is in this factual scenario that the Trial Court convicted the petitioners, and the conviction was upheld by the High Court. 7. The star argument raised by Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners was that there were 5 separate trials of the accused. However, the High Court without discussing the evidence in detail in each case separately has upheld the conviction by merely noticing the details of the exhibits, the prosecution witnesses and the defence witnesses in the matter. The petitioners cannot be said to be the persons involved in the cheating. They had not availed any undue benefit. Grant of loans by the banks is a normal practice. Security was furnished when overdraft facility was granted. Immediately when the petitioners were pointed out that the amount is to be returned back, they deposited the entire amount. No case of cheating was made out as Page 4 of 7the bank did not suffer any loss. It was a normal business transaction. In support of the arguments, reliance was placed upon the judgment of this court in A.T. Mydeen and Another vs. Assistant Commissioner, Customs Department3. 8. After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners, we do not find that any case is made out for grant of leave to appeal. As already noticed above it is a case where bank officers and the private businessmen, two of whom are petitioners before this court, had cheated the bank. The fraud started in the year 2002, when without there being any instrument submitted to the bank for clearance from the accounts in which there was no balance, entries were made in the external clearing account and local drafts account for giving credit to the petitioners. The entries were made on 27.09.2002 for clearing of overdraft of about ₹ 20 lakhs granted to the petitioner/T.R. Vijayaraman from July, 2002 onwards, immediately, after the petitioner opened his current account with the bank. The modus operandi having come to the notice of the higher officers, inspection of the branch was carried out on 09.01.2004. When confronted the accused persons got the amount deposited immediately on the next day. It came out in the report that 3 (2022) 14 SCC 392 : 2021 INSC 697 Page 5 of 7advance was enjoyed by the petitioners without payment of any interest. It was not a loan transaction as was sought to be argued.

--- JUDGMENT 360 ---
9. The argument that the High Court had failed to consider all the issues in detail is merely to be noticed and rejected as it was a case of confirmation of conviction by the Trial Court. Relevant facts have been noticed and relevant evidence discussed by the High Court, as it was agreeing with the views expressed by the Trial Court. 10. The manner in which the entries were made in the accounts could not be disputed. In SLP (Crl.) No.3787 of 2024, the amount deposited by the petitioner after the inspection was to the tune of ₹ 20.05 lakhs (Rupees twenty lakhs and five thousand only) which was ₹ 21.45 lakhs (Rupees twenty-one lakh and forty-five thousand only) in SLP (Crl.) No.3788 of 2024. 10.1 The argument that the petitioners did not have any control over the bank officials in the manner in which the entries were made in the books of accounts, is nothing else but of desperation. All the accused in connivance with each other have cheated the bank, by submitting cheques of the accounts in which there was no balance, or without any submission thereof and entries by the bank officers in the Page 6 of 7books of account showing them to be pending for clearing and giving credit to the account holder/accused. 11. We may also notice that SLP(Crl.) No.2722 of 2024 filed by the R. Geetha, one of the accused account holders in the same FIR, was dismissed by this court on 07.03.2024. 12. For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any case is made out for grant of leave to appeal. The Special Leave Petitions are accordingly dismissed. The petitioners are directed to surrender before the concerned Trial Court within 2 weeks from today. ……………….……………..J.

--- JUDGMENT 361 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 450 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S).1008 OF 2023 TRISHA SINGH .…PETITIONER(S) VERSUS ANURAG KUMAR ….RESPONDENT(S) O R D E R 1. The instant transfer petition came to be preferred by the petitioner-wife seeking transfer of the petition filed by the respondent-husband under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 being Matrimonial Case No. 2172/2022 titled as ‘Anurag Kumar S/o Ravindra Nath Sharma Vs. Trisha Singh’, pending before the Court of 7-Principal Judge, Family Court, Varanasi, U.P. to the Family Court at Pune, Maharashtra. 2. The transfer petition was dismissed for want of prosecution on 26th July, 2023. Subsequently, vide order dated 21st August, 2023, the transfer petition was restored to its original number and on the request of learned counsel for the parties, the matter was forwarded to the Supreme Court Mediation Centre for exploring 1the possibility of an amicable settlement between the parties. Pursuant to the efforts made by the Mediator, the parties had arrived at a settlement which was signed by the petitioner-wife and the respondent-husband before Shrabani Chakrabarty, Advocate/Mediator, Supreme Court Mediation Centre on 26th February, 2024. The relevant terms and conditions of the settlement agreement which in entirety shall form a part of this order are reproduced below: - “5. Both the parties hereto have arrived at an amicable settlement on the following terms and conditions for dissolution of marriage by mutual consent: - A. That the respondent husband continued to pay certain expenses voluntary to the tune of Rs.20 lakhs (Rupees twenty lakh only) from March 2020 upto October 2023 for his child to the bank account of the petitioner-wife including the period the parties were not together. Mediation took place at great length between the parties and parties want to part away taking divorce. The respondent- husband has agreed to pay full and final alimony of Rs.1 Crore 15 lakh (one crore and Fifteen lakhs only) to the petitioner-wife. The respondent husband has paid an amount of Rs.50 lakh to the petitioner wife on 22.02.2024. The remaining alimony will be paid will be as under: (i) Rs.50 Lakh (rupees fifty lakh) only shall be paid to the petitioner-wife on or before 31.08.2024; (ii) The remaining alimony of Rs. 15 lakh (rupees fifteen lakh) only will be paid on or before 31.12.2024. (iii) The gold and jewelries belonging to the petitioner- wife kept in a locker at Bank of India of Varanasi shall be taken by the petitioner within 14th to 20th March 2024. Petitioner will also collect silver items given on marriage from the respondent- husband.” 23. It is thus manifest that there was a clear undertaking by the parties before the Mediator that they shall part ways peacefully. 4. It is also clear that the respondent-husband had voluntarily paid a sum of Rs. 20 lakhs for the support of his child during the period from March, 2020 to October, 2023. The respondent- husband also paid a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs to the petitioner-wife in the terms of the settlement. The remaining amount of permanent alimony has been agreed to be paid as per the schedule indicated in the settlement deed. Out of this agreed amount, the respondent- husband has paid a sum of Rs. 50,00,000/-(fifty lacs) only to the petitioner-wife. 5. However, today when the matter was taken up, this Court was apprised that the petitioner-wife seems to have resiled from the settlement agreement. 6. Learned counsel for the petitioner-wife has affirmed that his client has stopped instructing him in the matter. Acting on the terms of the settlement, the respondent-husband has already withdrawn the matrimonial case on 23rd April, 2024 which fact is recorded in the order sheet of the Family Court placed on record with I.A. No. 112620 of 2024 and thus he is abiding by the terms of settlement in letter and spirit. 37. It seems, the petitioner-wife having taken advantage of the settlement executed before the Mediator has managed to get the matrimonial case instituted by the respondent-husband withdrawn. She has also accepted a sum of Rs.50 lakhs from the respondent-husband towards part payment of the permanent alimony and thereafter, she is trying to resile from the settlement without any justification. The conduct of the petitioner-wife is clearly, recalcitrant inasmuch as she has disregarded the terms and conditions agreed before the Mediator in the settlement proceedings which were undertaken pursuant to the directions of this Court. Not only this, because of her conduct, the respondent- husband has been put to grave disadvantage inasmuch as he has withdrawn the matrimonial case and has also paid a significant proportion of the permanent alimony to the petitioner-wife in terms of the settlement agreement. 8. Learned counsel for the respondent-husband on instructions states that his client undertakes to abide by the remaining terms and conditions of the settlement agreement in letter and spirit and shall make due payments on the schedule dates if the marriage is dissolved. 49.

--- JUDGMENT 362 ---
A similar situation was examined by this Court in the case of Ruchi Agarwal v. Amit Kumar Agrawal and Others1, the relevant excerpts whereof read as follows: - “4. It is the above order of the High Court that is under challenge before us in this appeal. During the pendency of the proceedings before the courts below and in this Court, certain developments have taken place which have a material bearing on the merits of this appeal. The complaint which the appellant herein filed is dated 10-4-2002. Thereafter, a divorce petition was filed by the appellant wife before the Family Court at Nainital. In the said divorce petition a compromise was arrived at between the parties in which it was stated that the first respondent husband was willing for a consent divorce and that the appellant wife had received all her stridhan and maintenance in lump sum. She also declared in the said compromise deed that she is not entitled to any maintenance in future. It is also stated in the said compromise deed that the parties to the proceedings would withdraw all criminal and civil complaints filed against each other which includes the criminal complaint filed by the appellant which is the subject-matter of this appeal. The said compromise deed contains annexures with the particulars of the items given to the appellant at the time of marriage and which were returned. The said compromise deed is signed by the appellant. But before any order could be passed on the basis of the said compromise petition, the appellant herein wrote a letter to the Family Court at Nainital which was received by the Family Court on 3-10- 2003 wherein it was stated that she was withdrawing the compromise petition because she had not received the agreed amount. But subsequently when her statement was recorded by the Family Court, she withdrew the said letter of 3-10-2003 and stated before the court in her statement that she wanted a divorce and that there is no dispute in relation to any amount pending. The court, after recording the said statement, granted a divorce under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, dissolving the marriage by mutual consent by its order dated 3- 3-2004. 5. In the compromise petition, referred to hereinabove, both the parties had agreed to withdraw all the civil and criminal cases filed by each against the other. It is pursuant to this compromise, the above divorce as sought for by the appellant was granted by the husband and pursuant to the said compromise deed the appellant also withdrew Criminal Case 1 (2005) 3 SCC 299 5No. 63 of 2002 on the file of the Family Court, Nainital which was a complaint filed under Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code for maintenance. It is on the basis of the submission made on behalf of the appellant and on the basis of the terms of the compromise, the said case came to be dismissed. However, so far as the complaint under Sections 498-A, 323 and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act is concerned, which is the subject-matter of this appeal, the appellant did not take any steps to withdraw the same. It is in those circumstances, a quashing petition was filed before the High Court which came to be partially allowed on the ground of the territorial jurisdiction, against the said order the appellant has preferred this appeal. 6. From the above-narrated facts, it is clear that in the compromise petition filed before the Family Court, the appellant admitted that she has received stridhan and maintenance in lump sum and that she will not be entitled to maintenance of any kind in future. She also undertook to withdraw all proceedings, civil and criminal, filed and initiated by her against the respondents within one month of the compromise deed, which included the complaint under Sections 498-A, 323 and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act from which complaint this appeal arises. In the said compromise, the respondent husband agreed to withdraw his petition filed under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act pending before the Senior Judge, Civil Division, Rampur and also agreed to give a consent divorce as sought for by the appellant. 7. It is based on the said compromise the appellant obtained a divorce as desired by her under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act and in partial compliance with the terms of the compromise she withdrew the criminal case filed under Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code but for reasons better known to her she did not withdraw that complaint from which this appeal arises. That apart after the order of the High Court quashing the said complaint on the ground of territorial jurisdiction, she has chosen to file this appeal. It is in this background, we will have to appreciate the merits of this appeal.

--- JUDGMENT 363 ---
8. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, however, contended that though the appellant had signed the compromise deed with the abovementioned terms in it, the same was obtained by the respondent husband and his family under threat and coercion and in fact she did not receive lump sum maintenance and her stridhan properties. We find it extremely difficult to accept this argument in the background of the fact that pursuant to the compromise deed the 6respondent husband has given her a consent divorce which she wanted, thus had performed his part of the obligation under the compromise deed. Even the appellant partially performed her part of the obligations by withdrawing her criminal complaint filed under Section 125. It is true that she had made a complaint in writing to the Family Court where Section 125 CrPC proceedings were pending that the compromise deed was filed under coercion but she withdrew the same and gave a statement before the said court affirming the terms of the compromise which statement was recorded by the Family Court and the proceedings were dropped and a divorce was obtained. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the appellant having received the relief she wanted without contest on the basis of the terms of the compromise, we cannot now accept the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant. In our opinion, the conduct of the appellant indicates that the criminal complaint from which this appeal arises was filed by the wife only to harass the respondents. 9. In view of the abovesaid subsequent events and the conduct of the appellant, it would be an abuse of the process of the court if the criminal proceedings from which this appeal arises is allowed to continue. Therefore, we are of the considered opinion to do complete justice, we should while dismissing this appeal also quash the proceedings arising from criminal case Cr. No. 224 of 2003 registered in Police Station Bilaspur (District Rampur) filed under Sections 498-A, 323 and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act against the respondents herein. It is ordered accordingly.

--- JUDGMENT 364 ---
2. Facts: The National Highway Authority of India (‘NHAI’), respondent no. 3 herein, awarded a contract for the design, construction and maintenance of a cable-stayed bridge across the river Chambal on NH-76 at Kota, Rajasthan to a joint venture company comprising of respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 2. 1The value of the project under the contract was Rs. 213,58,76,000/-. The contract provided that the construction work was to be completed within 40 months and the joint venture was thereafter assigned the task of maintaining the said bridge for a period of 6 years, of which, 2 years was the ‘defect-notification period’. NHAI also assigned consultancy services for design, construction and maintenance of the bridge to another joint venture of M/s Louis Berger Group Inc. (USA) and M/s COWI A/S (Denmark). 3. The appellant issued a Contractor’s All Risk Insurance Policy covering the interest of NHAI as principal, and M/s Hyundai Engineering Infrastructure Co. Ltd. along with M/s Gammon India as JV Contractor under the policy bearing No. 011900/44/07/03/60000001 for the period from 05.12.2007 to 04.12.2011 for a total amount of Rs. 213,58,76,000/-. The relevant clauses of the policy are extracted as follows: “SECTION I - MATERIAL DAMAGE: 1. The Company hereby agrees with the Insured (subject to the exclusions and conditions contained herein or endorsed hereon) that if, at anytime during the period of insurance stated in the Schedule, or during any further period of extension thereof the property (except packing materials of any kind) or any part thereof described in the 2Schedule be lost, damaged or destroyed by any cause, other than those specifically excluded hereunder, in a manner necessitating replacement or repair, the Company will pay or make good all such loss or damage upto an amount not exceeding in respect of each of the items specified in the Schedule the sum set opposite thereto and not exceeding in the whole the total Sum Insured hereby. The Company will also reimburse the Insured for the cost of clearance and removal of debris following upon any event giving rise to an admissible claim under this Policy but not exceeding in all the sum (if any) set opposite thereto in the Schedule. The term debris only of the Insured property and the cost of clearance and removal of debris pertaining to property not Insured by the policy will not be payable.” “EXCLUSIONS TO SECTION - I The Company, shall not, however, be liable for; a) the first amount of the loss arising out of each and every occurrence shown as Excess in the Schedule; b) loss discovered only at the time of taking an inventory; c) normal wear and tear, gradual deterioration due to atmospheric conditions or lack of use or obsolescence or otherwise, rust, scratching of painted or polished surfaces or breakage of glass; d) loss by damage due to faulty design; e) the cost of replacement, repair or rectification of defective material and/or workmanship, but this exclusion shall be limited to the items immediately affected and shall not be deemed to exclude loss of or damage to correctly executed items resulting from an accident due to such defective material and/ or workmanship; f) the cost necessary for rectification or correction of any error during construction unless resulting in physical loss or damage 3g) loss of or damage to files, drawings, accounts, bills, currency, stamps, deeds, evidence of debt, notes, securities, cheques, packing materials such as cases, boxes, crates; h) any damage or penalties on account of the Insured's non-fulfilment of the terms of delivery or completion under this Contract of construction or of any obligations assumed thereunder or lack of performance including consequential loss of any kind or description or for any aesthetic defects or operational deficiencies; i) loss of or damage to vehicles licensed for general road use or waterborne vessels or machinery/equipment mounted or operated or fixed on floating vessels/craft/barges or aircraft.” 4. The construction project commenced in December, 2007.

--- JUDGMENT 365 ---
While the construction was in progress, a part of the constructed bridge collapsed on 24.12.2009, resulting in the death of 48 workmen. On 26.12.2009, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India constituted a Committee of Experts (hereinafter, ‘Expert Committee’) under the chairmanship of the Director General (Road Development) and Special Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The task of this committee was to investigate and report the cause of the collapse. An FIR was also lodged against the respondents for offences under Sections 304/308 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. After investigation, a final report dated 19.03.2010 was filed wherein the officials of the respondent companies were charged under the said 4provisions. It was found that they were liable for the loss of 48 lives due to several defects at the stage of design, construction and supervision. 5. The NHAI intimated the appellant about the incident on 29.12.2009 and requested the deputation of a surveyor to assess the damage caused due to the accident and also sought indemnification of the loss. A surveyor was appointed. He commenced his work and by a letter dated 06.01.2010, he called for certain details and clarifications from the respondents. While furnishing the details, the respondents made a claim of Rs. 151,59,94,542/-. 6. The Committee of Experts constituted by the Government of India submitted its report on 07.08.2010. Relevant parts of some of the important findings of the Committee are as follows: “8.2.2 Views of the Committee 8.2.2.1 The majority of failures in structures occur during construction stages when they are most vulnerable. The Chambal Bridge Accident was a sudden and catastrophic structural failure. It may be pointed out that the bridge was at one of its critical stages at the time of the accident. […] 8.2.2.2 […] At this stage, as noted in para 5.8, the stabilizing moment would become less than the overturning moment. Uncontrolled rotation of the pylon about the base would take place which 5would result in its gaining momentum as it fell. This is borne out by the fact that the catastrophic failure involved a catapult action wherein the span P3-P4 as a whole, (which was tied together by prestressing cables) was thrown some 100 m away. 8.2.2.3 The serious distress in span P3-P4 referred to para 8.2.2.2 could have been caused by shortfall in design, poor workmanship, unexpected load, sub-standard material or distress in foundation P4 or a combination of some of these. […] 8.2.2.4 It can be seen that had there been additional stability devices in place (such as those mentioned in para 8.2.2.1) the cycle involving progressive loss of rotational restrain at the base of the pylon and accentuation of distress in P3-P4 might not have been initiated and the collapse might not have occurred.” 7. The final conclusions of the committee are relevant for this case, and are as follows: “CONCLUSIONS 9.1 From all the information made available by the various agencies as also the analysis and evaluation made by the Committee, it is felt that a combination of factors such as lack of stability and robustness in the partially completed structure, shortfalls in design and lack of quality of workmanship in the construction of span P3- P4 have contributed to the collapse of this bridge. The trigger for initiation of the collapse appears to have been unpredictable and sudden additional loading due to failure of supporting arrangement of the form traveller.” 69.2 Since this is a design-build "Turnkey Contract" which covers planning, investigation, design, construction and maintenance of the cable stayed bridge, the primary responsibility for the collapse lies with the Contractor, M/s Hyundai — Gammon (JV). The Contractors are responsible for allowing the structure to reach a vulnerable stage without taking adequate precautions with respect to stability and robustness of the partially completed structure and the short fall in the design. They are also responsible for deficiency in workmanship in the construction of span P3-P4. 9.3 The design for this bridge was prepared by M/s SYSTRA, the Design Consultants of the Contractor M/s Hyundai-Gammon (JV). Since there have been shortfalls in design, the responsibility for the same also lies with M/s SYSTRA. 9.4 The Supervision Consultants for this Project are M/s LBG-COWI whose duties include construction supervision along with the proof- checking of the design through M/s COWI While carrying out the proof-checking work M/s COWI have not highlighted the shortfalls in the design which have been observed subsequently by the Committee. Further, the Supervision Consultants have not been sufficiently proactive in preventing lapses in workmanship. They have also given tacit approval for major changes during construction without insisting on a proper review of the design by the Contractors / Design Consultants. As such, the Supervision Consultants are responsible for these lapses. 9.5 M/s Freyssinet acted as specialist Agency to M/s Hyundai for supply, installation and operation of the form traveller equipment for cantilever construction, post - tensioning work and installation of stay cables. Since the trigger 7for the collapse appears to be the failure of the Freyssibar and / or the supporting arrangement for the form traveller, the extent of their responsibility may be examined keeping in view the Contract Agreement between the concerned agencies. 9.6 Apportioning of extent of responsibility to the various agencies for the collapse of the structure could be examined further by the Employer (NHAI) keeping in view the contracts for this Project entered into between various agencies with each other and with NHAI.” 8. On 06.12.2010, NHAI issued a show-cause notice to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 calling upon them to justify as to why they should not be debarred. The respondents replied to the show cause notice, and after perusing the reply, the NHAI took a decision to permit them to carry out the remaining part of the contract. 9. In the meanwhile, the surveyor appointed by the appellant submitted its final report on 28.02.2011. While assessing the net loss at Rs. 39,09,92,828/-, the surveyor recommended to the appellant that the insurance claim must be rejected as the respondents no. 1 and 2 had violated the conditions of the insurance policy. Based on the surveyor’s report and also the findings and conclusions of the Expert Committee, the appellant repudiated the insurance claim in its letter dated 21.04.2011. 810. By their letter dated 17.06.2011, respondents nos. 1 and 2 requested the appellants to reconsider the decision of repudiation. In support of their contentions, the respondents relied on certain independent reports submitted by i) Mr. Jacques Combault; ii) M/s SETRA/CETE (French Ministry of Transportation Technical Department); iii) M/s Halcrow Group Ltd. and iv) AECOM Asia Co. Ltd. Relying on these reports, the respondents urged stated that there is no fault in the design of the bridge, and this is clearly reiterated by technical experts, who are specialists in the field. 11. As the appellant agreed to reconsider the repudiation, respondents no. 1 and 2 submitted various documents in support of their claim. The appellant re-considered the claim, and by a letter dated 17.04.2017 informed the respondents that the original decision of repudiation is affirmed as they did not find any justifiable reason for accepting the claim. The relevant portion of the said communication dated 17.04.2017 is as follows: “We refer to your letter Ref: 17011/27/2006- kota/CAR/RJ-05/3909, dt: 18.01.2017 and Contractor letter Ref: HZ-6718, dt: 04.02.2017 and also the subsequent meeting held at our office-Chennai. On perusal of the documents provided, we find that no further points have emerged in support of the claim. In view of the above we regret our inability to reconsider the claim which was repudiated.” 912. In the meanwhile, respondents no. 1 and 2 completed the work under the contract by 31.07.2017. The bridge was inaugurated and put to public use from 29.08.2017, and it is said to be operating since then. 13. Almost after 2 years of the rejection of the claim, on 24.01.2019, respondents no. 1 and 2 filed a Consumer Complaint No. 160 of 2019 before the NCDRC alleging deficiency in the appellant’s service and unfair trade practice adopted by it. 14. Decision of the NCDRC: At the outset, the NCDRC rejected the preliminary objection of the appellant that the summary jurisdiction under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter, ‘the CPA’) is not appropriate for dealing with complicated questions of law and fact. The objection relating to limitation in filing the complaint was also dismissed by holding that the period for calculating the limitation would commence from 17.04.2017 and not from 21.04.2011. 14.1 On merits of the matter, the NCDRC held that the report of the Committee of Experts was inconclusive as it could not identify the precise reasons for the collapse of the bridge. On the other hand, the NCDRC placed reliance on the reports of i) Mr. Jacques 10Combault, ii) the Halcrow Group, iii) SETRA and iv) AECOM Asia Co. Ltd., and came to the conclusion that there is no defect in the design of the bridge and that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 are not at fault. 14.2 Finally, the NCDRC relied on the decision of the NHAI permitting the respondent nos. 1 and 2 to proceed with the construction of the remaining part of the bridge and held that if the NHAI found the respondents to be competent enough to continue with the contract, it can safely be concluded that they were not at fault. 14.3 In this view of the matter, the NCDRC directed the appellant to pay the respondents no. 1 and 2 a sum of Rs. 39,09,92,828/- with an interest at 9% p.a. from the first date of repudiation, i.e., 21.04.2011. 14.4 Strangely, while the judgment of the NCDRC was pronounced on 16.01.2023, an addendum came to be added to the judgment. This addendum is undated and seeks to amend paragraphs 28 and 29 and directs payment of Rs. 151,59,94,542/- instead of Rs. 39,09,92,828/-. The relevant portion of the addendum is extracted here for ready reference: 11“32. It will be relevant to mention here that though the Complainant No.1, vide letter dated 27.02.2010 had submitted a detailed Claim Statement of ₹93,67,17,876 to the Surveyor but it was revised vide e-mail dated 07.03.2010 to the tune of ₹149,87,44,914/-. It was again revised vide letter dated 24.06.2010 (Serial No.2 of the Claim Statement - ₹8,29,15,604 to ₹10,01,65,232) to a final Claim of ₹151,59,94,542/-. The Surveyor had, however, assessed the total loss at ₹39,09,92,828/- . Even though in the Written Submissions filed by the Learned Counsel for the Complainants they have claimed that at least a net loss of ₹39,09,92,828/- be payable towards the insurance claim but in my considered opinion the Complainants are entitled for the payment of entire loss of ₹151,59,94,542/- claimed by them. 33. Consequently, the Complaint is partly allowed with a direction to the Insurance Company to pay a sum of ₹151,59,94,542/- to the Complainants along with interest @9% p.a. from the date of repudiation of the claim i.e. 21.04.2011 till the actual realization, within a period of 8 weeks from the date of passing of the order failing which the amount shall attract interest @12% p.a. for the said period. The Complainants shall also be entitled for a costs of ₹50,000/-.” 15. Mr. Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted that he is not in a position to support the judgment amending the paragraphs 28 and 29 and directing the payment of the revised amount of Rs. 151,59,94,542/-. It is unimaginable as to how the NCDRC could unilaterally revise the claim from Rs. 39,09,92,828/- to Rs. 151,59,94,542/-, without hearing the parties and more 12surprisingly when respondent nos. 1 and 2 have themselves filed written submissions confining the claim to Rs. 39,09,92,828/-. Be that as it may, in view of the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent that he will confine the claim Rs. 39,09,92,828/-, this issue need not detain us any further.

--- JUDGMENT 366 ---
v. Rajeshwar Sharma, (2019) 2 SCC 671; Canara Bank v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., (2020) 3 SCC 455; Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Samayanallur Primary Agricultural Coop. Bank, (1999) 8 SCC 543. 4 (2023) 1 SCC 428. 13with the main intention of the insurance. It is, therefore, the duty of the insurer to plead and lead cogent evidence to establish the application of such a clause5. The evidence must unequivocally establish that the event sought to be excluded is specifically covered by the exclusionary clause.6 The judicial positions on the nature of an insurance contract, and how an exclusion clause is to be proved, shall anchor our reasoning in the following paragraphs. 18. Seeking to justify their repudiation, the appellant relied on the affidavit of evidence by Mr. S. Anantha Padmanabhan, examined as RW 2. He produced the surveyor’s report as well as the Expert Committee’s report as Ex. RW 2/2. On the other hand, the reports of the independent experts relied upon by the respondents no. 1 and 2 were not marked as exhibits. They were not adduced in evidence as none of these experts was examined as a witness. Under these circumstances, we have no hesitation in coming to a conclusion that the appellants have discharged the burden as enunciated in Texco (supra). 5 National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Vedic Resorts and Hotels Pvt. Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 648. 6 National Insurance Co. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 367 ---
v. Ishar Das Madan Lal, 2007 (4) SCC 105. 1419. The Expert Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (‘MORTH’), Government of India. It was chaired by the Director General (Road Development) and Special Secretary, MORTH. The other members of the Committee were Mr. Ninan Koshi DG (RD) & AS (Retd.), Prof. Mahesh Tandon, Bridge Specialist, and Prof. A.K. Nagpal, Dept. of Civil Engineering, IIT Delhi. We have referred to the constitution as well as the expertise of the Committee only to assure ourselves that it comprised of experts in the field of civil engineering. It is also indicative of the fact that the members were independent and well- qualified to examine and submit a report. We would, therefore, be justified in relying on the findings of the Expert Committee. In fact, the NCDRC’s opinion about the Expert Committee is not about lack of credibility, or lack of expertise, rather its opinion was only that the Committee was not conclusive in its findings. 20. The proof of the pudding is in its eating - we will straight away refer to the relevant portions of the Expert Committee’s report. Referring to the variations introduced on-site without any approval by the design checker, the Committee held as follows: “5.1.2 Since this is a Design Build Contract, the Contractors M/s Hyundai-Gammon (JV) had appointed M/s SYSTRA of France as their Design 15Consultant. The designs prepared by M/s SYSTRA were proof checked by M/s COWI, the Proof Check Consultant. During the course of presentations and discussions with various agencies, there were some contradictions in the stand taken by M/s SYSTRA and M/s COWI as regards the extent of proof checking of designs by the Proof Check Consultant. In fact, M/s COWI in their submission dated 28th May, 2010 (Annexure L-21) have stated as follows: “The Design Checker verified the Final Design prior to start of construction. The variations introduced on site were introduced by the BOT Contractor. We expect that all variations were subject to verification and approval of the Designer. The Design Checker was not requested to review any design verification following variations on site from the Final Design. […]” (emphasis supplied) 20.1 The Committee noted that each lateral span of the bridge was supposed to be a monolithic structure. A lateral span is the structure between two support pillars. However, the collapsed lateral span was cast in multiple parts, as noted in the following paragraph: “5.3.3 M/s SYSTRA have expressed vide their submission dated 17th April, 2010 (Annexure H-11, page 3) that they have envisaged “one go” (i.e. monolithic construction) for each lateral span during the development of the design. However, during actual construction the lateral span P3-P4 was cast in seven parts. The lower part of the box girder (U-shaped section comprising bottom slab and webs upto about mid height) was concreted in four different stages with three vertical construction joints. The upper part of the box girder (comprising deck slab and top half of the 16webs) was later concreted in three stages (with two vertical construction joints). It has been informed by M/s Hyundai-Gammon JV vide their letter HN-1656 dated 1st September, 2009 (Annexure L-18, page 3) that M/s SYSTRA, the designer of the main bridge including lateral spans, were aware of this. In fact, Mr. J. Mirailles of M/s SYSTRA had visited the site in the month of July 2009 and stayed there for a couple of weeks to inspect the ongoing construction. The construction of lateral span P3- P4 in parts was being carried out at that time…” “5.3.5 The query of the Committee regarding position of M/s LBG-COWI in respect of applicability of Clauses of AASHTO relating to “Segmentally Constructed Bridges” to the design of lateral span P3-P4, was discussed with Mr. Nielsen of M/s COWI on 23rd June, 2010. Mr. Nielsen mentioned that as per his understanding, it was a case of segmental construction. […]” (emphasis supplied) 20.2 The Committee noted that the point at which the cable was going to be suspended with the pylon was crucial. It observed that the height at which the suspension took place was 77 metres, whereas, it was supposed to be 40 metres. The relevant paragraph is as follows: “6.2 The drawing No.A104-DWG-MB-FD-1301 REV. 1 dated 28th May, 2009 [Annexure H-01(ii)] shows that the lateral spans P3-P4 as well as P2- P3, should have been completed and external tendons tensioned before the first stay cable was installed. The steel box for anchoring the first stay cable was to be placed in the pylon at the height of 33.30m. Also, the first cantilever segment towards the river side from P4 was to be 17constructed only after the lateral spans P3-P4 and P2-P3 had been completed and fully prestressed. It is seen that this sequence was changed in the actual construction. Further, drawing No.A104- DWG-MB-FD-846 REV. 2(c) dated (??)/07/09 [Annexure H-01(ii)] specifically mentions that “tendons tensioning on span P2-P3 must be performed before pouring segment S10”. This requirement was also changed during actual construction. […] 6.3 …This implies that the height of the pylon should have been about 40 m at the time of tensioning of first stay cable at cantilever segment S10. However, it is seen that at the time of casting of segment S10, the free-standing pylon had already been constructed to a height of 77 m.” (emphasis supplied) 20.3 The other relevant portions cited to us from the Committee’s Report include para 6.5, which speaks about the changes in the sequence of construction without consulting or informing the design consultants of the project. Para 6.8 was relied on to highlight further discrepancies between the approved drawing plans and the actual construction. Concrete batching plants involved were of a lower capacity, leading to delays in construction of the lateral spans. Para 8.1.2 (iii) was also brought to our notice, as it spoke about the changes which were brought about without a proper technical review. The conclusions of the committee have already been quoted by us in paragraph 7 above, and it was found that: 18a) a combination of factors such as lack of stability and robustness in the structure, shortfall in design, lack of quality workmanship have all contributed to the collapse; b) the primary responsibility lies with the contractor, M/s Hyundai and Gammon (JV) who are responsible for allowing the structure to reach a vulnerable stage without taking adequate precautions and there is a shortfall in the design; c) there were shortcomings in the design for the bridge prepared by M/s SYSTRA and the responsibility for the design lies with M/s SYSTRA; d) M/S COWI, the supervision consultants have not highlighted the shortfall in the design. M/s COWI has not been sufficiently proactive in preventing lapses in workmanship. They have given tacit approvals for major changes without insisting on a proper review of the design; e) The trigger for the collapse appears to be the failure of M/s Freyssinet. Their responsibility must be examined in detail.

--- JUDGMENT 368 ---
1921. We are inclined to accept the appellant’s submission that there is sufficient evidence to justify repudiation of the claim on the basis of the exclusion clause. On the other hand, there is absolutely no evidence on behalf of the respondents. His argument is only that the Surveyor/Committee report is not clinching, it is open ended and does not hold that the respondents no. 1 and 2 are responsible for the negligence. 22. We will now refer to the surveyor’s report, the findings of which are as follows: “C) After a detailed study of the Insured’s submission vide their letter dt;27.02.2010 and several rounds of face to face interactions with the Insured’s Engineers at site, we derived the following inferences; 1). The junction at Pylon P4, was the most critical and vulnerable in the entire construction and had to be handled with due care and diligence. 2). It was clear and obvious, that, an unstable equilibrium has been created at this junction, (where, the over turning moment was in excess of resisting moment), due to the shearing of the slab in lateral span P3 -P4 at about 15 mts from the P4 junction, which has caused the tilting of the Pylon, dragging with it, spans P3-P4, P3-P2 and Piers P4, P3. The shearing of the slab is purely a Design aspect. 3). The restraints imposed on the movement of the Bearings at P4 were released by the Insured prior to completion of the main spans, which facilitated 20movement of Pylon along with Lateral spans and this is one of the most significant factors, contributing to this massive failure. 4). The sequence of operations in the construction of the Bridge were changed in actual construction to make up for the time lost and this has adversely affected the stability of the P4 joint. 5). Raising Pylon P4 to an abnormal height of 77 mts (out of 80 mts) without any lateral anchorage in the form of stringers, had left the Pylon P4 exposed to heavy wind pressure and in a state of unstable equilibrium, ready to collapse at any time, with the application of a little external force in excess. 6). We were informed that, the concreting of Lateral span P3-P4 was done in 7 stages, whereas, it should have been done at ONE GO. This leaves vertical joints which are vulnerable. We also noted that, the Insured had to resort to concreting in stages, due to insufficient Batching Plants. 7). Change in allocation of works amongst the Joint Venture Partners also played a key role in the quality of workmanship. At several places, M/s.Gammon had to carryout the jobs, supposed to have been carried out by M.s,Hyundai. Even in the affected location of P4, the construction of Pier P4 was the responsibility of M/s. Hyundai, whereas, it was carried out by M/s Gammon. 8). Lack of co-ordination and planning between proof checking consultant and design consultants could have been streamlined. […] 2111). The sequence of concreting carried out on the date of failure, as informed to us, was different from the versions of the Insured. […]” 23. It is important to note that the surveyor was examined as RW-1 and his evidence remained unrebutted. In National Insurance Company Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 369 ---
On the other hand, the surveyor has examined himself and adduced documents. Further, there is sufficient evidence to indicate that the surveyor has made site-visits and the proof of that was part of the pleadings filed before us. 28. The submission that NHAI continuing the contract with respondent nos. 1 and 2 and they have, in fact, completed the contract does not impress us. The continuation of work by respondent nos. 1 and 2 could be due to various reasons. Even if the NHAI’s decision to continue is taken to be a valid economic decision, that by itself cannot be a reason for not applying the applicable clause of the contract if such applicability is otherwise proved by cogent evidence. 29. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the NCDRC fell into a clear error of law and fact in allowing the 24consumer complaint for multiple reasons. As we have not agreed with the preliminary objection of the appellant to reject the complaint and relegate the respondents to civil court, we made extra efforts to examine the facts in detail. It is for this reason that the evidentiary value of the reports, their scope and ambit, and their contents were examined by us in some detail. 30. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeal and set- aside the impugned order dated 16.01.2023 passed by the NCDRC in Consumer Complaint No. 160 of 2019.

--- JUDGMENT 370 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 374 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO.3990 of 2011 KANIHYA @ KANHI (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. … Appellant (s) VERSUS SUKHI RAM & ORS. … Respondent(s) J U D G M E N T Rajesh Bindal, J. 1. The case in hand is an example of a party suffering on account of total casualness in dealing with the matter. An avoidable litigation. 2. The challenge is to the order1 passed by the High Court2 in Review Application3. By the said order the Review Application filed by the respondents was allowed. As a result, the earlier order4 passed by the High Court in revision5 was recalled. By the said order, the revision 1 Dated 26.10.2009 2 High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh 3 R.A. No.2-C-II of 2009 4 Dated 04.12.2008 5 Civil Revision No.1645 of 1992 Page 1 of 17filed by the present appellants was allowed, permitting them to make good the deficit of ₹14/-. 3. The facts as available on record are that part of land comprising of 1/4th share land in Khewat No.236 and Khatoni No.258 situated in Village Samchana, District Rohtak, Haryana, was sold by Jai Singh, Jai Kishan, Randhir, Shamsher Singh sons of Balbir Singh son of Dariyav Singh to Sukhi Ram, Ram Pal, Hari Om, Mahabir Singh (respondents-defendants). The predecessor in-interest of the appellants filed a suit for pre-emption.

--- JUDGMENT 371 ---
The same was decreed by the Trial Court on 11.08.1988. The predecessor in-interest of the appellants/plaintiffs was required to deposit a sum of ₹ 9,214/- minus 1/5th of the pre-emption amount already deposited, on or before 10.10.1988, failing which the suit shall stand dismissed. 3.1 Predecessor in-interest of the appellants filed an application on 19.09.1988 along with Treasury Challan in triplicate, seeking permission to deposit the amount as directed by the Trial Court. On the application the Trial Court passed the order for deposit of ₹ 7,600/-. It was claimed that the application and the challans were handed over in original to the appellant(s). The amount was deposited on the same day i.e. 19.09.1988. Page 2 of 173.2 On 06.12.1988, an application was moved by the judgment- debtor (defendant-respondent) seeking permission to withdraw the amount deposited by the appellant-plaintiff on which a report was submitted by the office on the same day. It was found that the amount deposited by the appellant-plaintiff was less by ₹ 14/-. 3.3 On 23.02.1989 the judgment-debtor (defendant- respondent) filed an application seeking dismissal of the suit on account of non-compliance of the direction given in the judgment and decree of the Trial Court, as there was failure on behalf of the appellant-plaintiff to deposit full amount within the time granted by the Trial Court. While the aforesaid application was pending, the appellant-plaintiff filed an application on 05.03.1991 seeking permission of the court to deposit deficit amount of ₹ 14/-. Subsequent to the filing of the aforesaid application, an application dated 25.05.1991 was also filed by the appellant-plaintiff seeking condonation of delay in filing the application seeking permission to make good the deficiency in deposit of the amount as per the decree of the Trial Court. 3.4 Vide order dated 09.01.1992, the application filed by the appellant seeking permission to deposit ₹ 14/- was dismissed by the Trial Court. Aggrieved against the same, the appellants preferred Page 3 of 17Revision Petition before the High Court which was initially allowed on 04.12.2008. However, on a Review Application filed by the respondents, the order passed by the High Court on 04.12.2008, was recalled and Civil Revision No.1645 of 1992 was dismissed vide order dated 26.10.2009. It is the aforesaid order which is under challenge in the present appeal.

--- JUDGMENT 372 ---
4. Impugning the aforesaid order, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the appellants are illiterate. In the case in hand, decree was passed in favour of the predecessor in-interest of the appellants on 11.08.1988 and the time was granted for deposit of the balance amount upto 10.10.1998 after reducing 1/5th of the amount already deposited in court. Accordingly, an application was moved seeking permission of the court to deposit the balance amount. On that application, order was passed by the court directing deposit of ₹ 7,600/- and the Treasury Challan was also annexed with the application. Immediately, the amount was deposited. It was found that there was an error in the calculation of the amount. As a result of which the deposit was short by ₹ 14/-. It was not intentional but due to a calculation error. Appellants cannot be said to be at default as even the court also directed for deposit of ₹ 7,600/- instead of ₹ 7,614/-. Page 4 of 174.1 An application was filed by the judgment-debtor (respondent-defendant) for dismissal of the suit on account of the non- deposit of the amount as per the decree within the time granted by the court. 4.2 The Trial Court, without appreciating the facts and circumstances of the case wrongly rejected the application moved by the appellant-plaintiff seeking permission of the Court to deposit the deficit amount of ₹ 14/-. The aforesaid order was challenged before the High Court. Initially, the Revision Petition was allowed vide order dated 04.12.2008. However, in the Review Application filed by the respondent, the order passed in the Revision Petition was recalled and the same was dismissed vide order dated 26.10.2009. 4.3 The Trial Court as well as the High Court have failed to appreciate the issue that the court is empowered to extend the time for deposit of the amount in case there was any error. In the case in hand there was a bona fide error. The parties should not be made to suffer on account of any error in the judicial proceedings. The amount was too meagre. In support of the arguments, reliance was placed on the Page 5 of 17judgments of this Court in Johri Singh v. Sukh Pal Singh and Others6 and Jang Singh v. Brij Lal and Others7.

--- JUDGMENT 373 ---
5. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the appellants having failed to comply with the terms of the decree passed in their favour, do not deserve any relief from this Court. The appellant-plaintiff had purchased the property by paying the full market price. A suit for pre-emption was filed by the appellant- plaintiff which was decreed. The decreetal amount was to be deposited by 10.10.1988. The appellant-plaintiff moved an application before the Trial Court along with pre-filled Treasury Challan seeking permission to deposit ₹ 7,600/-. It was on that application moved by the appellant- plaintiff, the court ordered for depositing of ₹ 7,600/-, which was deposited by the appellant-plaintiff. The amount as such was not calculated by the court as it was the duty of the appellant-plaintiff to deposit the correct amount in terms of the decree, which was explicit. 5.1 On an application moved by the respondent-defendant for withdrawal of the amount of ₹ 9,214/- in terms of the decree, the office reported on 06.12.1988 that the amount deposited was merely ₹ 9,200/-. Immediately, thereafter an application was filed on 6 (1989) 4 SCC 403 : 1989 INSC 265 7 (1964) 2 SCR 145 : AIR 1966 SC 1631: 1963 INSC 42 Page 6 of 1723.02.1989 by the respondent-defendant for dismissal of the suit on account of the non-compliance of the terms of the decree by the appellant-plaintiff. More than two years thereafter, the appellant- plaintiff moved an application seeking permission to deposit the balance amount of ₹ 14/- without explaining any reason for moving such an application at a belated stage. More than two months thereafter, an application was filed seeking condonation of delay in deposit of the amount. Even that also did not contain any reason. 5.2 Vide order dated 09.01.1992, the Trial Court dismissed the application filed by the appellant-plaintiff seeking leave to deposit ₹ 14/- on account of non-deposit of the whole amount within the time permitted. The order passed by the Trial Court was challenged by the appellants before the High Court. Initially, on a wrong premise the High Court allowed the revision petition and set aside the order of the Trial Court. However, there being error apparent on the record, the Review Application filed by the respondents was allowed and after recalling the earlier order passed in the Revision Petition, the High Court dismissed the same. 5.3 There is no error in the order passed by the High Court. Even if the time granted by the court for deposit of the amount can be extended but there has to be sufficient reason for the same. In the case Page 7 of 17in hand, there is no reason, what to talk about sufficient reason. There was no fault of the Trial Court as the order for deposit was passed on the same line as was prayed for by the appellants. 6. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book. 7. The respondents purchased the property in dispute from Jai Singh, Jai Kishan, Randhir and Shamsher Singh sons of Balbir Singh son of Dariyav Singh vide registered sale deed dated 06.08.1985. The appellants filed a suit for possession by way of preemption claiming that they being the co-sharers in the Joint Khewat had preferential right to purchase the property. The suit was filed on 11.08.1986. The suit was decreed on 11.08.1988. The appellants were directed to deposit a sum of ₹ 9,214/- minus 1/5th preemption amount already deposited, on or before 10.10.1988 failing which the suit was to be dismissed with costs. 8. The appellants moved an application dated 19.09.1988 before the court seeking permission to deposit the sum due as per the direction of the court. It was specifically mentioned in the application that as per the decree the appellants were required to deposit a sum of ₹ 9,214/- less 1/5th already deposited along with the application. Treasury Challan was also annexed mentioning the amount to be Page 8 of 17deposited by the appellants, i.e. ₹ 7,600/-. The court vide endorsement in the application itself on 19.09.1988 permitted the appellants to deposit ₹ 7,600/-. The amount was deposited by the appellants in the bank on the same day. 9. The respondents moved an application seeking permission to withdraw the amount deposited by the appellants in terms of the decree. The report dt. 06.12.1988 was submitted by the registry, that initially a sum of ₹ 1,600/- was deposited by the appellants on 09.09.1986 and subsequently after passing of a decree a sum of ₹ 7,600/- was deposited on 19.09.1988. Immediately thereafter the respondents moved an application dated 23.02.1989 before the court for passing further order and for dismissal of the suit as the appellants had failed to comply with the terms of the decree. The same was directed to be put up on 20.03.1989, 07.04.1989, 19.04.1989 and thereafter on 26.04.1989 for consideration. From the record, nothing is available as to what happened to this aforesaid application after the aforesaid date. Nothing is clearly evident regarding that from the records. 10. Thereafter, at page 75 of the original record, there is another application filed by the respondents with similar prayer. It was directed by the court vide order dated 23.04.1990 to be put up on Page 9 of 1725.04.1990, then on 30.04.1990. On that date, notice was directed to be issued to the other side for 12.05.1990. On the next date, the learned counsel appearing for the non-applicant/appellants sought time to file reply to the application. After seeking adjournment, reply was filed on 02.06.1990 taking the stand that the remaining amount was deposited after obtaining prior permission of the court and whatever direction was issued by the court the same was complied with. It was stated that whatever amount was payable was deposited, however, if there is any deficiency the appellants are ready to make the same good. 11. After filing of reply by the appellants the matter remained under consideration before the court. 12. On 05.03.1991, the appellants filed an application before the court seeking permission to deposit the balance sum of ₹ 14/- in which notice was issued to the other side for 23.03.1991. While the aforesaid application was pending, another application was filed by the appellants on 25.05.1991 seeking condonation of delay in depositing of ₹ 14/-. It was pleaded in the application that ₹ 14/- remained unpaid due to clerical mistake. The mistake was not intentional. Hence, delay be condoned.

--- JUDGMENT 374 ---
Page 10 of 1713. Finally, the application was taken up for consideration by the court and vide order dated 09.01.1992 the same was rejected. 14. Against the aforesaid order, the appellants preferred Revision Petition before the High Court, which was initially allowed vide order dated 04.12.2008. The High Court noticed the argument raised by learned counsel for the respondents therein namely the respondents herein that in preemption matter the court cannot extend the time for deposit of money. However, the Court went on to invoke its inherent jurisdiction for correction of error of the court. The revision was allowed. The appellants were granted time to deposit the balance sum of ₹ 14/-. The respondents filed the Review Application against the order of the High Court. The same was allowed and vide impugned order dated 26.10.2009, the earlier order passed by the High Court on 04.12.2008 was recalled and the revision was dismissed. 15. As far as the position of law and the question whether the court can extend the time for deposit of money in a pre-emption suit is concerned, this court in Johri Singh’s case (supra) considered a similar issue. In that case, the deposit was less by ₹ 100/-. The application filed by the decree holder therein seeking permission to deposit to make the deficiency good, after expiry of the time granted by the court, was allowed. The order was upheld by this court. In para Page 11 of 1721, this court opined that the Trial Court in the decree only mentioned a sum to be deposited by the decree holder minus the amount of “zare- panjum”. The amount was not specified in the judgment. Error in calculation occurred, as a result of which ₹ 100/- was deposited less. The application filed by the decree holder therein with challan annexed was allowed by the court without pointing out the error. After deposit of the amount though little deficient, even the possession of the property was delivered to the decree-holder. Relevant paras 20, 21, 25 and 26 are extracted below: “20. In the third category of cases, namely, non- deposit of only a relatively small fraction of the purchase money due to inadvertent mistake whether or not caused by any action of the court, the court has the discretion under Section 148 CPC to extend the time even though the time fixed has already expired provided it is satisfied that the mistake is bona fide and was not indicative of negligence or inaction as was the case in Jogdhayan [(1983) 1 SCC 26 : (1983) 1 SCR 844] . The court will extend the time when it finds that the mistake was the result of, or induced by, an action of the court applying the maxim “actus curiae neminem gravabit” — an act of Page 12 of 17the court shall prejudice no man, as was the case in Jang Singh [AIR 1966 SC 1631 : (1964) 2 SCR 145] . While it would be necessary to consider the facts of the case to determine whether the inadvertent mistake was due to any action of the court it would be appropriate to find that the ultimate permission to deposit the challaned amount is that of the court. 21. Proceeding as above, in the instant case we find that the decree did not quantify the purchase money having only said “Rs 41,082 less the amount of ‘zare panjum’ ”. Of course, ‘certum est quod certum reddi potest’— that is certain which can be rendered certain. The amount of ‘zare-panjum’ was not specified. Parties do not controvert that it was one fifth. But the amount was not calculated by the court itself.

--- JUDGMENT 375 ---
Inadvertent error crept in arithmetical calculation. The deficit of Rs 100 was a very small fraction of the total payable amount of Rs 33,682 which was paid very much within the fixed time, and there was no reason, except for the mistake, as to why he would not have paid this Rs 100 also within time. The appellants' application with the challan annexed was allowed by Page 13 of 17court officials without pointing out the mistake. The amount was deposited and even possession of the property was delivered to the appellant. The Senior Subordinate Judge allowed the application made by appellant in exercise of the discretion vested in him apparently on the view that sufficient cause had been out for non-deposit of Rs 100. This order, however, as seen above, was set aside by the High Court in a civil revision under Section 115 CPC. xx xx xx 25. In this view of the matter there seems to be no manner of doubt that the Senior Subordinate Judge had jurisdiction to extend the time under Section 148 CPC on sufficient cause being made out. The first condition precedent to enable the High Court to exercise its revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 CPC was, therefore, lacking. Likewise, nothing has been brought to our notice on the basis of which it could be said that the discretion exercised by the Senior Subordinate Judge was in breach of any provision of law or that he committed any error of procedure which was material and may have Page 14 of 17affected the ultimate decision. That being so, the High Court had no power to interfere with the order of the Senior Subordinate Judge, however profoundly it may have differed from the conclusions of that Judge on questions of fact or law. 26. On the facts and circumstances of the case we feel justified in allowing this appeal, setting aside the impugned judgment of the High Court, and in restoring that of the Senior Subordinate Judge allowing 10 days' time to deposit the balance of Rs 100 exercising power under Section 148 CPC on facts of the case. If the amount has not already been deposited, it shall be deposited within 30 days from today and the respondents shall withdraw the same according to law. The appeal is accordingly allowed, but under the facts and circumstances of the case, without any order as to costs.” 16. The facts of the case in hand are identical. In the instant case as well the balance amount to be deposited by the appellant was not specified in the decree. The deficiency was only ₹ 14/-. The appellants had already deposited ₹ 9,200/- including the preemption amount already deposited. When the application was filed seeking permission Page 15 of 17to deposit the amount along with the Treasury Challan, the error was not noticed by the Court. At the very first stage, in response to the application filed by the respondents to pass appropriate order on account of deficiency by the appellants to deposit the amount as directed by the court, the appellants stated that in case there is any deficiency, they are ready to make it good. The court could have considered the same and passed appropriate orders.

--- JUDGMENT 376 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 804 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL No. 6186 of 2018 S. P. PANDEY …APPELLANT(S) VERSUS UNION OF INDIA & ORS. …RESPONDENT(S) O R D E R PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 1. The appellant is not satisfied that the Armed Forces Tribunal, Jaipur has allowed his OA and quashed the order of Admonition passed against him on 18.01.2011. He demands compensation for the wrongful order by filing the present appeal. We agreed with him and for reasons to follow, allowed the appeal and granted compensation. 2. Facts of the case are that the appellant was enrolled in the Indian Air Force in 1997 as Airman in the trade of Radar Fitter. At the relevant time, he was posted on the strength of 333 TRU C/o 5 FBSU, Air Force where he commenced work from 16.11.2009. 2.1 The incident in question occurred on 17.05.2010, at about 14.20 hrs when he was returning home from duty. On his way back, he had 1to stop at a railway crossing in a civil area which was closed. The gate was closed due to transit of a train. The allegation against the appellant is that, instead of waiting behind the vehicles already in line at the railway crossing, he overtook all the vehicles, went straight ahead and parked his motorcycle in front of the railway gate. 2.2 Respondent No. 7 a Sqn Ldr (Squadron Leader) who was also waiting for the railway barrier to open, approached the appellant and in ‘exercise of the responsibility’ conferred on officers of the Air Forces under Para 565 of the Regulations questioned the appellant for overtaking all vehicles, pulled out the motorcycle keys and directed the him to park his motorcycle in Guard Room. The respondent no. 7 handed over the keys to Duty NCO and informed the appellant that his motorcycle is being confiscated for not following good order and Air Force discipline. This led to an argument between the appellant and respondent No. 7 wherein the appellant allegedly used insubordinate language (yah kaya gundagardi hai) contrary to Air Force discipline. Respondent No. 7 ordered closed arrest of the appellant and informed the Commanding Officer and the Adjutant of the Unit. Charge sheet for two offences, i.e. “Violation of good order and Air Force Discipline” and “Use of insubordinate language to a superior officer” was drawn against the appellant. 22.3 The charge was tried by Officiating Commanding Officer on 18.05.2010 and an order of Admonition was passed on the same day. However, respondent No. 4 the Station Cdr. 5 FBSU sought sanction for expunction of punishment entry from the documents of the appellant and to proceed with de novo trial of the appellant for the above alleged misconduct on the technical ground that sanction under Section 83 of the Air Force Act, 1950 was not obtained. 2.4 The appellant preferred a statutory complaint dated 24.05.2010.

--- JUDGMENT 377 ---
Wg Cdr V.K. Mohan proceeded de novo against the same charge and ordered for recording of Summary of Evidence on 30.06.2010. The appellant preferred a representation to the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief with the prayer 4to stay operation of order dated 30.06.2010 for recording of Summary of Evidence and prohibit the Commanding Officer to conduct the second trial for the same charges. The representation preferred by the appellant was rejected by Chief of Air Staff vide order dated 06.01.2011. 5. In the circumstances, a second Admonition order was passed against the appellant dated 18.01.2011. He appealed to respondent No. 2 and even this was rejected on 28.04.2011. The representation to the Chief of Air Staff for reconsideration of order dated 06.01.2011 which was also rejected on the ground of it being repetitive in nature. 6. Being aggrieved, the appellant approached the Armed Forces Tribunal by filing an Original Application. After hearing the appellant and the respondents and having gone through the materials and records before it, the Tribunal set aside the punishment of ‘Admonition’ passed against the appellant vide order dated 18.01.2011. It is important to extract the conclusion of the Tribunal, the relevant part of the order is extracted as follows: “11. Before proceeding further we may recall that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is of 'admonition'. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that on date, the petitioner has retired from service and any further indulgence would gain no fruitful result even if the punishment of 'admonition' is set aside and now the issue involved remains only of academic interest. 12. Be that as it may, we feel it worth mentioning that from the sequence of events on record, it is evident that the entire episode got triggered by the fact that in a civil area, i.e. at a railway crossing, the petitioner, like many other service/civil motor 5cyclists had overtaken the long queue of cars to position themselves in front row, close to the railway crossing barrier. No doubt, it is expected of every Air Warrior/Airman to uphold highest degree of discipline inside and outside his service place. But at the same time, from the events noticed hereinbefore, it is borne out that the petitioner had overtaken the parked four wheelers and motorcycles on a public road near the railway crossing barrier and had parked his motorcycle in the front row, may be to avoid rush of traffic when the barrier opened. It appears that this gesture of the petitioner was taken as an affront by the Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey and he approached the petitioner from the rear and forcefully took away the keys of the motorcycle; confiscated the motorcycle on the ground that the petitioner violated traffic rules and general road discipline, ordered the petitioner to report to the guard room and took the applicant in custody. It was on his orders the petitioner was locked in a cell. The strict action taken by Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey in a public place over a trivial issue cannot at the same time be appreciated. Even if in the opinion of Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey the petitioner had committed some wrong in public place, the circumstances of the case required him to have advised the petitioner to mend his ways in future keeping in view the high discipline and dignity of the Air Force. But the manner in which the whole incident was highlighted in full public gaze, and consequent action taken by him, permitting a trivial happening to escalate out of proportion, cannot be appreciated. An offence is an officer and his behaviour should also be officer-like. His behaviour has to set up an example. The incident could have been handled by the officer more appropriately. 13. From the record, it is revealed that the petitioner was assured in writing on two occasions that the punishment entry will be expunged. Despite that, the respondent chose to proceed afresh. It gives an indication of vindictiveness and perhaps it was instigated by the officer. 14. For reasons mentioned hereinabove, we are of the considered view that the Summary of Evidence and punishment of 'admonition" awarded to the applicant deserve to be set aside. 15. Accordingly, punishment of 'admonition' dated 18.01.2011 awarded to the petitioner is set aside. Impugned order dated 28.04.2011 (Annexure-27 to the petition), and order dated 06.01.2010 (Annexure-25 to the petition) are also set side. Consequences to follow. So far as prayer of the petitioner for directing Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey, respondent no.7 to pay compensation to the petitioner is concerned, we find that the petitioner has not been able to make out a case, hence rejected. 16. T.A is disposed of accordingly.” 66.1 It is apparent from the findings of the Tribunal that the respondent No. 7, took the incident personally and forcefully confiscated the keys of the motorcycle and ordered the appellant to report to the Guard room. The Tribunal also notices that he was taken into custody. The Tribunal also recorded that at the instance of respondent No. 7 the appellant was locked in the Cell. While deprecating the conduct of respondent No. 7 for adopting such a severe action over a trivial issue, the Tribunal opined that the officer of a rank of Sq. Ldr. could have given a proper advice to the appellant, to rectify his actions, keeping in view the high discipline and dignity of Airforce. However, the manner in which respondent No. 7 conducted himself was not appreciated. While deprecating the conduct of respondent No. 7 the Tribunal also came to the conclusion that the appellant was subjected to harassment and humiliation giving an impression of vindictiveness at the instance of the concerned officers. It is for this reason the Tribunal had no hesitation in setting aside the punishment. The Tribunal set aside the order of Admonition dt. 18.01.2011. It also set aside the order dated 28.04.2011, whereby the appellant’s statutory appeal had been dismissed. Lastly, the Tribunal also set aside the order dated 06.01.2010, wherein the Air Force Commander had rejected the appellant’s representation. Thus, the decision and the findings of the Tribunal have attained finality. 76.2 However, for reason that the Tribunal rejected the prayer for compensation, the present appeal filed by the appellant. We have gone through the material on record, findings of the Tribunal and noted the submissions of Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, counsel for the appellant and by Mr. R. Bala, senior counsel for the respondents. 7. The initial service of the appellant for 14 long years, from its commencement in 1997 to 2011 was unblemished. This is an admitted fact. From the unfortunate incident on 17.05.2010, the appellant’s life was embroiled in defending in the disciplinary proceedings and contesting the case before the Tribunal. The disproportionate measure adopted by the respondents, the assurance of expunging the admonition, withdrawal of the same and then the retrial, leading to imposition of the punishment caused great amount of distress. 8. The findings of the Tribunal are categorical. It found that the matter was escalated beyond proportion and there is also an element of vindictiveness in the action taken against the appellant. More than anything, the lone battle of the appellant against the unfair and arbitrary treatment meted out to him, we think is the cause and reason for the indignation. The institution did not protect him, instead it put its full force behind respondent No. 7. Fortunately, the Tribunal set the record straight. 89.

--- JUDGMENT 378 ---
Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has submitted the financial loss that has occurred to the appellant and prayed for appropriate compensation. 10. Small excesses like overtaking the vehicle of one’s senior at a railway crossing may be an incident of indiscipline in defense services, but the balance and proportion that needs to be maintained between such an infraction and its punishment will always be at the core of good governance. If the balance is not maintained, the distinction between bad governance, impropriety, unfairness and inhuman treatment is not much. The Tribunal is right in holding that a small incident has unnecessarily grown beyond proportion. 11. When the institutions that we build grow beyond proportion, officers act mechanically and many a times helplessly, ignore the simple and readily available remedies that are available in our normal lives. We would have thought that an incident like this would have ended if a senior officer had at the right time intervened and resolved the issue by taking into account the emotional aspect of the dispute. Perhaps a simple apology by respondent No. 7 would have gone a long way, but that did not happen, and we are now called upon to assess the economic value of the indignity and proceed to grant monetary compensation to him. We are aware of how insignificant the monetary 9value of loss of dignity could be, but legal remedies that they are, enable us to settle it only as a measure, a token of our concern and in recognition of a citizen’s identity and dignity. 12. Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and having noted the specific and clear findings of the Tribunal, we direct the respondents to pay an amount of Rs. 1 lakh to the appellant towards compensation for having suffered an unnecessary and a long- drawn litigation that was foisted on him. The amount may be paid within a period of 30 days from the date of this order. 13. The Civil Appeal is disposed of in the above-mentioned terms. ………………………………....J.

--- JUDGMENT 379 ---
D.L. Chidananda, appearing for the respondent-State rose to the occasion and made crisp, clear and categorical arguments to match the submissions made by the senior counsels. 2. The facts, to the extent they are relevant for our consideration, are that the Banglore University, constituted under the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000,1 issued an advertisement dated 1 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘Universities Act’. 121.03.2018 for filling up backlog vacancies to posts reserved for scheduled castes (SC’s) and scheduled tribes (ST’s). Of the 34 posts advertised for Assistant Professors, one post of Assistant Professor in the department of English was reserved for a candidate belonging to the ST community. 3. The advertisement provides that qualifications for the post shall be as provided under the UGC Regulations, 2010 and the UGC (4th Amendment) Regulations, 2016. The ‘Mode of Selection’, or the method of selection, as specified in the advertisement, is important.2 It is provided that the list of selected candidates will be prepared as per the Karnataka State Civil Services (Unfilled Vacancies Reserved For Persons Belonging to the SC’s and ST’s) (Special Recruitment) Rules, 2001, hereinafter referred to as the ‘2001 Rules’. Rule 6 of the 2001 Rules provides for a preference in favour of candidates between the age bracket of 29 and 40 years. In other words, amongst the eligible candidates belonging to a scheduled tribe, those who fall within the age bracket of 29- 2 “MODE OF SELECTION The list of selected candidates will be prepared as per the following Government of Karnataka Notifications: 1. No. DPAR 13 SBC 2001 dated: 21.11.2001 & Dated: 01.06.2002 2. UGC Regulations 2010, UGC (4th Amendment) Regulations, 2016 and AICTE 2016 Regulations.” 240 years, would have a preferential right to be appointed over and above even meritorious candidates. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 380 ---
The Ld. Single Judge of the High Court, by a judgment dated 16.01.2021, allowed the writ petition and set aside the appellant’s selection and appointment on the ground that the university specifically declared in the advertisement that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. Therefore, its appointment of the appellant, who did not fall in the age bracket of 29-40 years, was illegal. Consequently, Respondent No. 7, who is the preferential candidate, was directed to be appointed. 36. The appellant and the university filed their respective writ appeals, namely W.A. 190/2021 and 233/2021, before the Division Bench of the High Court. While confirming the order of the Single Judge, the Division Bench also directed that respondent No. 7 is entitled to be appointed as per the 2001 Rules. Thus, the present Civil Appeal by the appellant, who was the originally appointed candidate. 7. Before we consider the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to three legislations that have a bearing on the case. The Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 19783; the Karnataka SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation of Appointments etc.) Act, 19904; and the Karnataka State Universities Act, 20005. Very importantly, we will also consider the applicability of the 2001 Rules framed under the Civil Services Act, 1978. 8. The relevant law governing the filling up of backlog vacancies as per the advertisement issued by the university will be the Reservation Act, 1990 and the 2001 Rules. These rules are made under the Civil Services Act, which naturally relates to civil services under the State of Karnataka. The applicability of the 2001 Rules to appointments by the universities, which is 3 Hereinafter referred to as the Civil Services Act, 1978. 4 Hereinafter referred to as the Reservation Act, 1990 5 Hereinafter referred to as the Universities Act, 2000. 4governed by the University Act, is the controversy that has led to the present litigation. 9. The Bangalore University is governed by the Karnataka Universities Act, 2000. Section 536 of this law recognises a ‘Board of Appointment’ to be the appointing authority for teachers and other employees of the university. Section 547 provides that notwhithstanding anything in Section 53, but subject to the rules and orders of the State Government, appointments to the posts of professors, readers, principals and asst. professors shall be made by the syndicate as per the scheme evolved by the UGC. Furthermore, under Section 78, the Universities Act is given an overriding effect to it over other statutes. 10. Apart from the Universities Act, there is an overarching law, namely, the Karnataka SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation of 6 “Section 53. Appointment of Teachers, Librarians.- (1) There shall be a Board of Appointment for selection of persons for appointment as teachers and librarians in the University […]” 7 “Section 54. Appointment in accordance with the promotion schemes.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 53 but subject to the rules and orders of the State Government issued from time to time for reservation of appointment and posts for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under Article 16(4) and 16(4A) of the Constitution, the appointment to the post of Professors and Readers, Principals and Assistant Professors in the constituent Engineering Colleges and to the post of Principal Grade-I, Principal Grade-II, Lecturer (Selection Grade), Lecturer (Senior Scale) in the constituent Engineering Colleges shall be made by the Syndicate in accordance with the scheme governing promotions as prescribed by the Statutes adopting the schemes evolved by the University Grants Commission or All India Council for Technical Education.[…]” 5Appointment etc.) Act, 1990. It is intended to provide reservations in favour of SCs, STs and other OBCs in the state civil services and ‘establishments’. The definitions of ‘establishment’ and ‘appointing authority’ under the Reservation Act, 1990 are relevant. Section 2(2) and 2(3)(vi) defines ‘appointing authority’ and ‘establishments in public sector’ as follows: “Section 2. Definitions: In the Act, unless the context otherwise requires […] (2) "appointing authority" in relation to a service or posts, means the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post; (3) "establishments in public sector" means,- […] (vi) a University established or deemed to have been established by or under any law of the State Legislature […]”. 10.1 The most relevant provision in the Reservation Act, 1990 is Section 4 and it is extracted hereinafter for ready reference:- “ Section 4. Reservation of appointments or posts etc:- (1) After the appointed day, while making appointments to any office in a civil service of the State of Karnataka or to a civil post under the State of Karnataka, appointments or posts shall be reserved for the member of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes to such extent and in such manner as may be specified from time to time in the order made by the Government under clause 4 of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.” (emphasis supplied) 10.2 There was uncertainty about the applicability of the procedure contemplated under Section 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990 for the appointments of teachers by the universities, as Section 4 speaks 6about appointments in the civil service of the state and civil posts under the State of Karnataka. A common understanding was that an office in the civil service of the state or a civil post under the state did not include ‘teachers’ as contemplated under S. 53 of the Universities Act. This uncertainty was greater with respect to filling up of backlog vacancies in the university by following the procedure provided in the 2001 Rules. 10.3 It is under these circumstances that an amendment was proposed to the Reservation Act, 1990. The statements of objects and reasons (‘SOR’) for the introduction of sub-section (1A) to Section 4 clarifies the position and helps us understand the newly introduced sub-Section (1A) in its proper perspective. “Amending Act 8 of 2004.- Government issued a Notification dated: 21.11.2001 under the Karnataka Civil Services (Unfilled Vacancies reserved for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Special Recruitment) Rules, 2001 for filling up of vacancies reserved for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This Special Recruitment Rules was published under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Karnataka Civil Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990) in Notification No. DPAR 13 SBC 2001, dated 6th August 2001. The Notification was issued to fill all unfilled vacancies by all the appointing authorities wherever the service conditions are governed by the Karnataka Civil Services Act, 1978. The Cabinet appointed a sub- committee of the Cabinet to monitor and review the progress. The Social Welfare Department was made the nodal Department. As on date the Social Welfare 7Department has identified 17021 numbers of vacancies out of them, 14485 have already been notified, of which 11573 vacancies are filled up and the balance is in the process of being filled. During the course of the review meeting it was pointed out to the Cabinet Sub Committee that the Karnataka Civil Services (Unfilled Vacancies reserved for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Special Recruitment) Rules, 2001 does not apply to the Universities, including Agriculture Universities and other institutions, etc., because they do not come under the purview of the said Rules. The non-inclusion of these institutions under the purview of the Notification dated 21.11.2001 and 1.6.2002 meant that the filling up of the backlog vacancies by the Universities and other institutions could suffer from a legal infirmity. In view of the fact that the process of recruitment by these institutions i.e., Universities etc. 80% of the recruitment are already over, both for teaching and non- teaching staff and the persons recruited have already reported and are working, there is an immediate need to amend the Act to legally enforce the recruitment’s already made.[…]” 10.4 It is clear from the SOR that the Cabinet Sub-Committee realised that the 2001 Rules were not made applicable to Universities as they do not come with the purview of the 2001 Rules. It is for this reason that the Reservation Act, 1990 is amended and the following sub-Section (1A) was introduced. The newly included sub-section (1A) to Section 4 of the Act is as follows: “Section 4: Reservation of appointments or posts etc:- 1. […] (1A). Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the appointing authority shall identify unfilled vacancies reserved for the persons 8belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in any service or post in an establishment in public sector as existing on the date of commencement of the Second Amendment Act, 2004 and take action to fill them as a one time measure within a specified time. The manner in which the number of vacancies is to be computed, the procedure for filling such vacancies and the time within which action is to be taken shall be as specified by notification by the State Government. Provided that the provisions of sub-section shall not apply to any unfilled vacancy in Karnataka State Civil Services or Post in respect of which provisions have been already made […]” (emphasis supplied) 11. The above-referred amendment to Section 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990 had the effect of bringing universities established by the state, within the mandate of sub-section (1A) of the Reservation Act, 1990. A combined reading of Section 2(2), 2(3)(vi) and sub- sections (1) and (1A) of Section 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990 with Section 53 and 54 of the Universities Act, 2000 would establish that the Board of Appointment of the university is tasked with identifying the unfilled vacancies reserved for SCs and STs existing as on the amendment dated 2004 and to fill them up as a one-time measure within a specified time. Till here there is no difficulty.

--- JUDGMENT 381 ---
Mr. Gagan Gupta, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondent no. 7, submits that the mandate under Section 4(1A) on the Government to specify the method and manner of selection by the issuance of a notification stood fulfilled when the university itself advertised by notifying that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. He also submitted that this is the natural consequence of the purpose and object of introducing sub-Section (1A), which was to enable the universities to follow the 2001 Rules. He also relied on certain letters written by the State Government calling upon the university to follow the mandate of the 2001 Rules. 16. We will examine the question as to whether the advertisement issued by the university intending to follow the 2001 Rules made under the Civil Services Act suffers from any illegality. If we come to the conclusion that compliance with the 2001 Rules is mandatory, we will affirm the judgments of the Ld. Single Judge and the Division Bench, and dismiss these appeals. On the other hand, if we find that the 2001 Rules have no application, or that 11they are not extended to appointment by the university, we will allow the appeals and affirm the appellant’s appointment. 17. The controversy about filling up backlog vacancies of SCs and STs by the university comes to an end with the insertion of Section 4(1A) of the Reservation Act, 1990. In fact, the provocation for introducing sub-Section (1A) is that the mandate of the 2001 Rules was not followed by the universities. In order to extend the provision of the 2001 Rules to universities, sub-Section (1A) was introduced and this is clear from the SOR of the amendment introducing sub-section (1A). 18. The identification, procedure and the time for computing, filling and completing the exercise of filling up backlog vacancies is specifically delegated under sub-Section (1A) to the Government. The intent behind the amendment is to vest the power of specifying the method, procedure and time for identifying, filling and completing the same to the State. The importance of the Government specifying the same lies in the fact that these incidents vary from service to service and establishment to establishment. The Government is best placed to address the same due to its resources. This is also evident from Section 54 of the Universities Act, which suggests that appointments to several posts in a university shall be laid down by the Government. It is 12an admitted fact that there is no notification issued by the Government to this effect. However, the university was aware of the continuous demand of the Government to follow the method of selection provided in the 2001 Rules. Therefore, in compliance with the statutory requirement and the Governmental demand, it issued the advertisement declaring that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. 19. There have been letters by the Government demanding compliance with the 2001 Rules while filling up the backlog vacancies for posts for SCs/STs and OBCs. We will now refer to these letters. Even before the advertisement was issued on 21.03.2018, there was a letter addressed by the Principal Secretary, Department of Higher Education, State of Karnataka, to the university on 27.02.2018, instructing the latter to fill up backlog teaching posts as per the 2001 Rules and the guidelines prescribed by the university. We may mention at this very stage that similar letters were addressed by the State Government to the university on 22.05.2018 and 09.06.2021, directing that the procedure contemplated under the 2001 Rules must be followed for filling up the vacancies of SC/ST and other backward classes in the university. With these letters, the issue relating to the 13legality and validity of the university’s advertisement is beyond doubt. 20. While we reject the submission of Mr. Shailesh Madiyal that the advertisement declaring that the 2001 Rules will be the ‘Mode of Selection’, is a mistake, we also hold that the university is bound to comply with what is declared in its advertisement: the 2001 Rules will be the guiding principles for the selection in question. We state this for the following reasons.

--- JUDGMENT 382 ---
Firstly, there was no uncertainty left after the introduction of sub-Section (1A) to Section 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990, requiring an establishment, i.e., the university, to take action for filling the backlog vacancies as a one-time measure by following the method prescribed by the Government. Secondly, the purpose and object of the amendment was amply clear from its SOR contemplating the application of the 2001 Rules for the universities. Thirdly, the conduct of the university in not responding to the categorical demands of the Government through its letters dated 27.02.2018, 22.05.2018 and 09.06.2021 to implement the 2001 Rules is conclusive about its acceptance of the applicable law and the policy, and therefore, the advertisement. Hence, the requirement of the Government to specify the manner, procedure and time for identifying, filling backlog vacancies and completing the same was amply clear to 14the university. It is with this view that the university advertised that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. 21.

--- JUDGMENT 383 ---
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition filed by respondent no. 7 was rightly allowed by the Ld. Single Judge of the High Court. While re-iterating the reasoning of the Single Judge, the Division Bench by the detailed order, upheld the findings of the Single Judge. Having considered the matter in detail, we have given our own reasons why respondent no. 7 should succeed even before this court. The appeals must, therefore, fail, and we hereby dismiss the same. 22. Having dismissed the appeals, we realise that an unusual situation has arisen in this case because of the university's conduct. Though the appellant was appointed in contravention of Rule 6 of the 2001 Rules, she continued in office during the subsistence of the writ proceedings. When the Ld. Single judge allowed respondent no. 7’s writ petition and set aside the appellant’s appointment dated 27.12.2019, the appellant approached the Division Bench and obtained a stay. After the Division Bench affirmed the Ld. Single Judge’s order and dismissed the writ appeal, she approached this court and again obtained a stay, and this order is operating till date. In other words, the appellant's appointment dated 27.12.2019 is 15continuing till date without any interruption. She has been working for almost four and a half years. On the other hand, the wrongful denial of appointment to respondent no. 7 was addressed by the Ld. Single Judge and Division Bench of the High Court by setting aside the appellant's appointment, and also directing that respondent no. 7 must be given the appointment instead. While we have agreed that respondent no. 7 must succeed and be restituted to the rightful position that he had earned, the university must also address the concern of the appellant. The unfortunate situation has arisen not because of anything wrong attributable to the appellant, but due to the indifferent manner with which the university conducted itself. In order to obviate the injustice caused to the appellant, the university may consider creating a supernumerary post to accommodate her. We are fully conscious of the limitations in creating such posts over and above the positions that are borne by a cadre,9 but this is an situation for exercising such discretion.10 We leave it to the university to take a decision on this issue and pass the necessary orders. 9 Official Liquidator v. Dayanand, (2008) 10 SCC 1. 10 N.T. Devin Katti v. Karnataka Public Service Commission, (1990) 3 SCC 157. 1623. For the reasons stated above, the Civil Appeal Nos. 6772- 6773/2023 against the judgment and final order dated 12.03.2021 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Writ Appeal No. 233 of 2021 c/w Writ Appeal No. 190 of 2021 (S-RES) are dismissed, subject to the observations made in the previous paragraph. 24. There shall be no order as to costs. ……………………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 384 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 389 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7708 OF 2014 ALL INDIA BANK OFFICERS’ CONFEDERATION ..... APPELLANT VERSUS THE REGIONAL MANAGER, CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA, AND OTHERS ..... RESPONDENTS WITH CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18459 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18460 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18462 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18463 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18461 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18464 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 18465-18466 OF 2017 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 18457-18458 OF 2017 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18467 OF 2017 J U D G M E N T SANJIV KHANNA, J. This common judgment decides the appeals filed by staff unions and officers’ associations of various banks, impugning judgments which dismiss Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 1 of 17their writ petitions, where the vires of Section 17(2)(viii) of the Income Tax Act, 19611 or Rule 3(7)(i) of the Income Tax Rules, 19622, or both, were challenged. 2. Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act includes in the definition of ‘perquisites’3, ‘any other fringe benefit or amenity’, ‘as may be prescribed’.4 Rule 3 of the Rules prescribes additional ‘fringe benefits’ or ‘amenities’, taxable as perquisites, pursuant to Section 17(2)(viii). It also prescribes the method of valuation of such perquisites for taxation purposes. Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules stipulates that interest-free/concessional loan benefits provided by banks to bank employees shall be taxable as ‘fringe benefits’ or ‘amenities’ if the interest charged by the bank on such loans is lesser than the interest charged according to the Prime Lending Rate5 of the State Bank of India6. 3. Section 17(2)(viii) and Rule 3(7)(i) are challenged on the grounds of excessive and unguided delegation of essential legislative function to the Central Board of Direct Taxes7. Rule 3(7)(i) is also challenged as arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the 1 For short, “Act”. 2 For short, “Rules”. 3 Section 17(2) of the Act defines perquisites. It specifies a list of benefits/advantages, incidental to employment, and received in excess of salary, which are made taxable as perquisites. Section 17(2)(viii) is a residuary clause that authorizes a subordinate rule-making authority to prescribe ‘any other fringe benefits or amenities’ that are liable to taxation as ‘perquisites’. 4 Before amendments brought in by Finance (No.2) Act, 2009, with effect from 01.04.2010, Section 17(2)(vi) of the Act read: “(vi) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity (excluding the fringe benefits chargeable to tax under Chapter XIIH) as may be prescribed”. Post the amendment, Section 17(2)(viii), in effect contains the same stipulations as erstwhile Section 17(2)(vi), with some modifications. It states: “(viii) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed.” Thus, the present Section 17(2)(viii) contains similar stipulations as erstwhile Section 17(2)(vi), reference to Chapter XIIH only being deleted. To retain uniformity, we will be referring to it as Section 17(2)(viii). 5 For short, “PLR”. 6 For short, “SBI”. 7 For short, “CBDT”. Civil Appeal No.

--- JUDGMENT 385 ---
7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 2 of 17benchmark instead of the actual interest rate charged by the bank from a customer on a loan. 4. Sections 15 to 17 of the Act relate to income tax chargeable on salaries.  Section 15 stipulates incomes that are chargeable to income tax as ‘salaries’.  Section 16 prescribes deductions allowable under ‘salaries’.  Section 17 defines the expressions ‘salary’, ‘perquisites’ and ‘profits in lieu of salary’ for Sections 15 and 16. 5. Section 17(1) includes in the definition of ‘salary’: wages, annuity or pension, gratuity, fee, commission, perquisites, or profits in lieu of or in addition to salary or wages, advance of salary, payments received by an employee in respect of leave not availed, annual accretion to the balance at the credit of the employee participating in a recognised provident fund, etc. 6. Section 17(2) relates to ‘perquisites’ and reads:8 “(2) “Perquisite” includes— (i) the value of rent-free accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer computed in such manner as may be prescribed; (ii) the value of any accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer at a concessional rate. Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, it is clarified that accommodation shall be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if the value of accommodation computed in such manner as may be prescribed, exceeds the rent recoverable from, or payable by, the assessee; (iii) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided free of cost or at concessional rate in any of the following cases— 8 Post 01.04.2010. Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 3 of 17(a) by a company to an employee who is a director thereof; (b) by a company to an employee being a person who has a substantial interest in the company; (c) by any employer (including a company) to an employee to whom the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this sub-clause do not apply and whose income under the head “Salaries” (whether due from, or paid or allowed by, one or more employers), exclusive of the value of all benefits or amenities not provided for by way of monetary payment, exceeds fifty thousand rupees: Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the use of any vehicle provided by a company or an employer for journey by the assessee from his residence to his office or other place or work, or from such office or place to his residence, shall not be regarded as a benefit or amenity granted or provided to him free of cost or at concessional rate for the purposes of this sub-clause; (iv) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any obligation which, but for such payment, would have been payable by the assessee; and (v) any sum payable by the employer, whether directly or through a fund, other than a recognised provident fund or an approved superannuation fund or a Deposit- linked Insurance Fund established under Section 3- G of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of 1948), or, as the case may be, Section 6-C of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), to effect an assurance on the life of the assessee or to effect a contract for an annuity; (vi) the value of any specified security or sweat equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the employer, or former employer, free of cost or at concessional rate to the assessee. Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub- clause,— (a) “specified security” means the securities as defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and, where employees' stock option has been granted under any plan or scheme therefor, includes the securities offered under such plan or scheme; (b) “sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by a company to its employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than cash for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called; Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 4 of 17(c) the value of any specified security or sweat equity shares shall be the fair market value of the specified security or sweat equity shares, as the case may be, on the date on which the option is exercised by the assessee as reduced by the amount actually paid by, or recovered from the assessee in respect of such security or shares; (d) “fair market value” means the value determined in accordance with the method as may be prescribed; (e) “option” means a right but not an obligation granted to an employee to apply for the specified security or sweat equity shares at a predetermined price; (vii) the amount or the aggregate of amounts of any contribution made to the account of the assessee by the employer— (a) in a recognised provident fund; (b) in the scheme referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 80-CCD; and (c) in an approved superannuation fund, to the extent it exceeds seven lakh and fifty thousand rupees in a previous year; (viia) the annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during the previous year to the balance at the credit of the fund or scheme referred to in sub-clause (vii) to the extent it relates to the contribution referred to in the said sub-clause which is included in total income under the said sub- clause in any previous year computed in such manner as may be prescribed; and (viii) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed: xx xx xx” (emphasis supplied) 7. Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules9 reads: “(7) In terms of provisions contained in Sub-Clause (vi) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 17,10 the following other fringe benefits or amenities are hereby prescribed and the value thereof shall be determined in the manner provided hereunder: (i) the value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from the provision of interest-free or concessional loan for any purpose made available to the employee or any member of 9 As it stands after amendment vide Income Tax (First Amendment) Rules, 2004, with effect from 01.04.2004. 10 See supra note 4.

--- JUDGMENT 386 ---
7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 5 of 17his household during the relevant previous year by the employer or any person on his behalf shall be determined as the sum equal to the simple interest computed at the rate charged per annum by the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), as on the 1st day of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same purpose advanced by it on the maximum outstanding monthly balance as reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any such member of his household. However, no value would be charged if such loans are made available for medical treatment in respect of diseases specified in Rule 3A of these Rules or where the amount of loans are petty not exceeding in the aggregate of Rs.20,000: Provided that where the benefits relates to the loans made available for medical treatment referred to above, the exemption so provided shall not apply to so much of the loan as has been reimbursed to the employee under any medical insurance scheme." 11 8. Section 17(1), provides a broad and inclusive definition of ‘salary’. It states that salary, inter alia, includes wages as well as other payments paid to employees like perquisites. Thus, perquisites paid by the employer to the employee are taxable as ‘salary’. 9. ‘Perquisite’ has been defined in Section 17(2) for clarity, and also, to include and widen its scope. Clauses (i) to (viiia) to Section 17(2) make the following taxable as ‘perquisites’:  Clause (i) - rent-free accommodation by employer.  Clause (ii) - accommodation at a concessional rate by employer.  Clause (iii) - benefit of amenity provided free of cost/at a concessional rate, in specified cases. 11 It is relevant to state here that the appellants have not challenged Rule 3(7)(i) as it existed for the period 01.04.2001 to 31.03.2004, that is, prior to the amendment vide the Income Tax (First Amendment) Rules, 2004, with effect from 01.04.2004. We are thus referring to the said Rule. Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 6 of 17 Clause (iv) - sum paid by the employer for an obligation.  Clause (v) – sum payable by the employer through a fund (barring specified exceptions) to effect an assurance on the life of the assessee or to effect a contract for annuity.  Clause (vi) – specified security or sweat equity shares allotted/transferred by employer at concessional rate/free of cost.  Clause (vii) – specified amounts contributed to assessees’ account by employer such as provident fund, superannuation fund etc.  Clause (viia) – annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or other similar amounts with respect to clause (vii). 10. After specifically stipulating what is included and taxed as ‘perquisite’, clause (viii) to Section 17(2), as a residuary clause, deliberately and intentionally leaves it to the rule-making authority to tax ‘any other fringe benefit or amenity’ by promulgating a rule. The residuary clause is enacted to capture and tax any other ‘fringe benefit or amenity’ within the ambit of ‘perquisites’, not already covered by clauses (i) to (viia) to Section 17(2). 11. In terms of the power conferred under Section 17(2)(viii), CBDT has enacted Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules. Rule 3(7)(i) states that interest-free/concessional loan made available to an employee or a member of his household by the employer or any person on his behalf, for any purpose, shall be determined as the sum equal to interest computed at the rate charged per annum by SBI, as on the first date of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same purpose advanced by it on the maximum outstanding monthly balance as reduced by interest, if any, actually paid. However, the loans made available for medical Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 7 of 17treatment in respect of diseases specified in Rule 3A or loans whose value in aggregate does not exceed Rs.20,000/- , are not chargeable. 12. The effect of the rule is twofold. First, the value of interest-free or concessional loans is to be treated as ‘other fringe benefit or amenity’ for the purpose of Section 17(2)(viii) and, therefore, taxable as a ‘perquisite’. Secondly, it prescribes the method of valuation of the interest-free/concessional loan for the purposes of taxation. 13. While enacting laws, the legislature can and does delineate the meaning of terms through explicit definitions. Specific meanings are assigned for precision, to distinguish words/expressions from loose or popular meanings, expand or restrict the scope of words or expressions, or to designate ‘terms of art’, that is, words or phrases with specialized meanings. Explicit definitions are useful, but it is wrong to state that all words or expressions must be explicitly defined. Defining each word or expression that is part of normal or commercial vocabulary is neither possible nor expedient. It would be a superfluous exercise, and make statutes voluminous. Instead, popular meaning makes the statute simpler and easier for the common people. After all, it is the common person who is concerned with the ramifications of a statute, and thus, the common man’s understanding is the definitive index of the legislative intent. The reason is simple. The legislature is assumed to be aware of the well-understood meaning attributed to the word/expression, and by necessary implication the legislature by not prescribing a fixed and exact definition, ascribes the prevalent meaning assigned to the word/expression in common parlance or commercial usage. This would include meaning assigned to technical words in a particular trade, business or profession, etc. when the Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 8 of 17legislation is concerning a particular trade, business or transaction. This rule equally applies to construing words or expressions in a taxation statute. 14. In the present case, Section 17(2(viii) is a residuary clause, enacted to provide flexibility. Since it is enacted as an enabling catch-within-domain provision, the residuary clause is not iron-cast and exacting. A more pragmatic and commonsensical approach can be adopted by locating the prevalent meaning of ‘perquisites’ in common parlance and commercial usage. 15. The expression ‘perquisite’ is well-understood by a common person who is conversant with the subject matter of a taxing statute. New International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary defines ‘perquisites’ as any incidental profit from service beyond salary or wages; hence, any privilege or benefit claimed due.12 ‘Fringe benefit’ is defined as any of the various benefits received from an employer apart from salary, such as insurance, pension, vacation, etc. Similarly, Black’s Law Dictionary defines ‘fringe benefit’ as a benefit (other than direct salary or compensation) received by an employee from the employer, such as insurance, a company car, or a tuition allowance.13 The Major Law Lexicon has elaborately defined the words ‘perquisite’ and ‘fringe benefit’.14 16. ‘Perquisites’ has also been interpreted as an expression of common parlance in several decisions of this Court. For example, ‘perquisite’ was interpreted in Arun Kumar v. Union of India15, with respect to Section 17(2) of the Act. The 12 The New International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary, p.941.

--- JUDGMENT 387 ---
Page 10 of 1720. Two issues arise for consideration now: (I) Does Section 17(2)(viii) and/or Rule 3(7)(i) lead to a delegation of the ‘essential legislative function’ to the CBDT?; and (II) Is Rule 3(7)(i) arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the benchmark? I. Does Section 17(2)(viii) and/or Rule 3(7)(i) lead to a delegation of the ‘essential legislative function’ to the CBDT? 21. A Constitution Bench of Seven Judges of this Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Birla Cotton, Spinning and Weaving Mills, Delhi and Another19, has held that the legislature must retain with itself the essential legislative function. ‘Essential legislative function’ means the determination of the legislative policy and its formulation as a binding rule of conduct. Therefore, once the legislature declares the legislative policy and lays down the standard through legislation, it can leave the remainder of the task to subordinate legislation. In such cases, the subordinate legislation is ancillary to the primary statute. It aligns with the framework of the primary legislation as long as it is made consistent with it, without exceeding the limits of policy and standards stipulated by the primary legislation. The test, therefore, is whether the primary legislation has stated with sufficient clarity, the legislative policy and the standards that are binding on subordinate authorities who frame the delegated legislation. 22. In our opinion, the subordinate authority’s power under Section 17(2)(viii), to prescribe ‘any other fringe benefit or amenity’ as perquisite is not boundless. It is demarcated by the language of Section 17 of the Act. Anything made taxable by the rule-making authority under Section 17(2)(viii) should be a ‘perquisite’ 19 (1968) SCC OnLine SC 13. Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 11 of 17in the form of ‘fringe benefits or amenity’. In our opinion, the provision clearly reflects the legislative policy and gives express guidance to the rule-making authority. 23. Section 17(2) provides an ‘inclusive’ definition of ‘perquisites’. Section 17(2)(i) to (vii)/(viia) provides for certain specific categories of perquisites. However, these are not the only kind of perquisites. Section 17(2)(viii) provides a residuary clause that includes ‘any other fringe benefits or amenities’ within the definition of ‘perquisites’, as prescribed from time to time. The express delineation does not take away the power of the legislature, as the plenary body, to delegate the rule-making authority to subordinate authorities, to bring within the ambit of ‘perquisites’ any other ‘fringe benefit’ or annuities’ as ‘perquisite’. The legislative intent, policy and guidance is drawn and defined. Pursuant to such demarcated delegation, Rule 3(7)(i) prescribes interest- free/loans at concessional rates as a ‘fringe benefit’ or ‘amenity’, taxable as ‘perquisites’. This becomes clear once we view the analysis undertaken in Birla Cotton 7J (supra) viz. the ‘essential legislative function’ test. 24. Birla Cotton 7J (supra) refers to In Re.: The Delhi Laws Act 191220, wherein this Court held that an unlimited right of delegation is not inherent in the legislative power itself. The legitimacy of delegation depends upon its usage as an ancillary measure, which the legislature considers necessary for the complete and effective exercise of legislative powers. Provided that the legislative policy is enunciated with sufficient clearness or a standard is laid down, the courts should not interfere with the discretion that undoubtedly rests 20 1951 SCC 568. Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 12 of 17with the legislature itself in determining the extent of delegation necessary in a particular case. 25. Birla Cotton 7J (supra) refers to Raj Narain Singh v. Chairman, Patna Administration Committee21, wherein this Court held that an executive authority can be authorised by a statute to modify either existing or future laws but not in any essential feature. What constitutes an essential feature cannot be enunciated in exact terms. However, it was held that modification could not include a change in policy, since the ‘essential legislative function’ consists of the determination of legislative policy and its formulation as a binding rule of conduct. In the context of Section 17(2)(viii) and Rule 3(7)(i), we are of the opinion that main legislation does not fall foul of the essential feature test. They do not modify an essential feature nor do they violate the condition of determining legislative policy or a binding rule of conduct. 26. Birla Cotton 7J (supra) also refers to Hari Shankar Bagla v. State of Madhya Pradesh22, where the majority held that the legislature must declare the policy of law and legal principles which are to control any given cases and thereby provide a standard of guidance to the executive, empowered to execute laws. 27. In Western India Theatres Limited v. Municipal Corporation of the City of Poona23, referred by Birla Cotton 7J (supra), the issue related to the power of the municipality to levy “any other tax to the nature and object of which the approval of the Governor-in-Council shall have been obtained prior to the selection contemplated”. The delegated legislation was upheld on the ground 21 (1955) 1 SCR 290.

--- JUDGMENT 388 ---
28. In Birla Cotton 7J (supra), the assessee had challenged a resolution passed by the municipal corporation to levy three taxes, including a levy of tax on consumption or sale of electricity. The challenge was that the levy of tax by the Corporation was by way of excessive delegation and was therefore ultra vires. This Court relied upon the judgment in Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot v. State of Madhya Pradesh24, to uphold the levy. In Pandit Banarsi (supra), this Court had observed that a delegated legislation is not unconstitutional when the legislature leaves it to the executive to determine details relating to the working of taxation laws, such as selection of persons on whom the tax has to be levied, the rates at which it is to be charged in respect of different classes of goods and the like. The principal legislature, it was held, has not given unqualified power to fix the rate of tax without guidance, control or safeguard. 29. Pandit Banarsi Das (supra) also refers to Powell v. Apollo Candle Company Ltd.25 which had upheld the power of delegation to levy duties by observing that there was complete guidance in the manner of fixing the rate of duty and 24 1959 SCR 427. 25 8 AC 282.

--- JUDGMENT 389 ---
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 14 of 17finally the order passed by the Governor had to be laid before both Houses of the Parliament without unnecessary delay. 30. In Devidas Gopal Krishnan v. State of Punjab26, this Court distinguished its earlier decision in Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema27 where the majority upheld the fixation of tax on cinema shows, albeit the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 had failed to prescribe a limit to which tax could go. The majority in Liberty Cinema (supra) had referred to Pandit Banarsi Das (supra) and held that there is no in-principle distinction between delegation of power to fix rates of taxes to be charged on different classes of goods and power to fix rates simpliciter; if power to fix rates in some cases can be delegated then equally the power to fix rates generally can be delegated. The Court held that if the power to decide who is to pay the tax is not an essential part of legislation, neither would the power to decide the rate of tax be so. The Court thus held that fixation of tax rate was not unqualified as the legislature had stipulated the maximum rate. The guidance rule was held as satisfied. 31. We are of the opinion that the enactment of subordinate legislation for levying tax on interest free/concessional loans as a fringe benefit is within the rule- making power under Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act. Section 17(2)(viii) itself, and the enactment of Rule 3(7)(i) is not a case of excessive delegation and falls within the parameters of permissible delegation. Section 17(2) clearly delineates the legislative policy and lays down standards for the rule-making authority. Accordingly, Rule 3(7)(i) is intra vires Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act. 26 AIR (1967) SC 1895. 27 (1965) 2 SCR 477. Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 15 of 17Section 17(2)(viii) does not lead to an excessive delegation of the ‘essential legislative function’. II. Is Rule 3(7)(i) arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the benchmark? 32. Rule 3(7)(i) posits SBI’s rate of interest, that is the PLR, as the benchmark to determine the value of benefit to the assessee in comparison to the rate of interest charged by other individual banks. The fixation of SBI’s rate of interest as the benchmark is neither an arbitrary nor unequal exercise of power. The rule-making authority has not treated unequal as equals. The benefit enjoyed by bank employees from interest-free loans or loans at a concessional rate is a unique benefit/advantage enjoyed by them. It is in the nature of a ‘perquisite’, and hence is liable to taxation. 33. Rule 3(7)(i), it can be hardly argued, is arbitrary or irrational for the reason it benchmarks computation of the perquisite with reference to the SBI’s PLR. SBI is the largest bank in the country and the interest rates fixed by them invariably impact and affect the interest rates being charged by other banks. By fixing a single clear benchmark for computation of the perquisite or fringe benefit, the rule prevents ascertainment of the interest rates being charged by different banks from the customers and, thus, checks unnecessary litigation. Rule 3(7)(i) ensures consistency in application, provides clarity for both the assessee and the revenue department, and provides certainty as to the amount to be taxed. When there is certainty and clarity, there is tax efficiency which is beneficial to both the tax payer and the tax authorities. These are all hallmarks of good tax legislation. Rule 3(7)(i) is based on an uniform approach Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. Page 16 of 17and yet premised on a fair determining principle which aligns with constitutional values. 34. It is also apposite to note that when it comes to uniform approach the laws relating to fiscal or tax measures enjoy greater latitude than other statutes.28 The Legislature should be allowed some flexibility in such matters and this Court would be more inclined to give judicial deference to legislative wisdom.29 Commercial and tax legislations tend to be highly sensitive and complex as they deal with multiple problems and are contingent. This Court would not like to interfere with the legislation in question, which prevents possibilities of abuse and promotes certainty. It is not iniquitous, draconian or harsh on the taxpayers. A complex problem has been solved through a straitjacket formula, meriting judicial acceptance. To hold otherwise, would lead to multiple problems/issues and override the legislative wisdom. The universal test in the present case is pragmatic, fair and just. Therefore, Rule 3(7) is held to be intra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. 35. We, accordingly, dismiss the appeals and uphold the impugned judgments of the High Courts of Madras and Madhya Pradesh. No order as to costs. ......................................J.

--- JUDGMENT 390 ---
2024 INSC 395 Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No.270 of 2012 Mrs. Bhumikaben N. Modi & Ors. …Appellant(s) Versus Life Insurance Corporation of India …Respondent(s) J U D G M E N T C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 1. The appellants herein were the respondents before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi (for short ‘the NCDRC’). As per the impugned order, the NCDRC allowed revision petition No. 3384 of 2006 filed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India, the respondent herein and reversed the concurrent orders of the forums below passed in favour of the appellants herein and dismissed C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 1 of 35their complaint that culminated in a direction in their favour for grant of compensation. 2. Succinctly stated, the facts that led to the captioned appeal, are as follows: - The appellants are the widow and the children of one Shri Narender Kumar Kantilal Modi (hereafter referred to as ‘the deceased’) who met with an accidental death due to electric shock on 14.07.1996. Prior to his death, the deceased submitted a proposal form for Life Insurance Policy on 06.07.1996 and issued cheque of Rs. 3388/- towards premium on 09.07.1996 through cheque No. 187009 dated 08.07.1996 of Dhokla Branch of State Bank of Saurastra. At this juncture, it is to be noted that there is no dispute regarding the permissibility of effecting premium in the said mode. After the death of the deceased the appellants herein claimed benefits based on Insurance Policy Diary No. 832471906. Even after 14 months since the death of the policy holder, the C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 2 of 35respondent did not give any benefit and as such the appellants were constrained to cause legal notice. The stand of the respondent for repudiating the claim was that the proposal submitted by the deceased was not accepted and therefore there is no concluded contract between the deceased and the respondent. In fact, the respondent had blocked policy No.832471906 and issued Acceptance-cum-First Premium Receipt showing the policy No. 832471906.

--- JUDGMENT 391 ---
3. In the aforementioned circumstances, aggrieved by the repudiation, the appellants herein approached the District Forum by filing complaint No. 1044 of 1997 in terms of Section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (for short “the Act”). As per order dated 19.07.2001, the District Forum allowed the complaint and directed the respondent to pay total outstanding amount payable to the appellants as per terms and conditions of Insurance Policy No. 832471906 along with interest at the rate of C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 3 of 3512% per annum till realization within 30 days from the date of receipt of the copy of the order. Further, it was directed to pay Rs. 5000/- to the appellants towards compensation for mental agony and harassment as also Rs. 2000/- towards costs. Aggrieved by the order of the District Forum, the respondent herein/the opponent therein filed an appeal viz. appeal No. 464 of 2002 before the State Commission. The State Commission dismissed the appeal as per order dated 25.07.2006 against which the respondent herein filed a revision petition before the National Commission in terms of the provisions of the Section 21 (b) of the Act. The impugned order was passed thereon and it resulted in reversal of the concurrent orders of the forums below and dismissal of the complaint. 4. Heard, learned counsel for the appellant and also the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent. The factum of submission of proposal for C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 4 of 35Life Insurance Policy on 06.07.1996 by the deceased and also issuance of cheque bearing No. 1870092 therewithal towards premium are not in dispute. The allotment of policy No. 832471906, rather its blocking in the name of the deceased is also not in dispute. The contention of the appellants before the District Forum was that the respondent had accepted the first premium amount and issued Acceptance-cum-First Premium Receipt on 09.07.1996 and in view of the nature of the receipt issued the respondent could not have repudiated the claim and wriggled out of the liability to assume the risk. 5. Per contra, the respondent took the stand that the policy prepared was not actually communicated to the deceased and it was blocked on 15.07.1996 owing to the demise of the proposer Shri Narender Kumar Kantilal Modi. Further, it was contended that in the aforesaid circumstances there was no concluded contract between the deceased and the respondent. It is to be noted that C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 5 of 35even after taking such a stand the respondent offered Rs. 1 Lakh on ex gratia basis to the appellants. However, the appellants refused to accept the same and claimed the amount payable in terms of the terms and conditions in Policy No. 832471906. Obviously, the District Forum took note of the rival factual contentions and also the further fact of payment of commission in respect of the policy to the agent and consequently, the defence raised on behalf of the respondent herein to justify that the repudiation of the claim was rejected and the complaint was allowed. 6. In the appeal before the State Commission, the respondent reiterated the contentions unsuccessfully taken before the District Forum. As noticed before, the core contention was that on the date of death of “the deceased” there was no concluded contract between the insurer and the deceased. The contentions raised did not find favour with the State Commission and the State C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 6 of 35Commission found that the acceptance of the proposal was unconditional and in favour of the deceased and therefore the contract should relate back to the date from which the insurance coverage was granted i.e., w.e.f. 28.06.1996.

--- JUDGMENT 392 ---
Assigning such a reason, the State Commission dismissed the appeal. It is the order of the appeal confirming the order of the District Forum that was taken up in revision before the NCDRC by the respondent herein, which culminated in the impugned order. 7. A perusal of the impugned order would reveal that for reversing the concurrent orders and dismissing the complaint, the NCDRC assigned the reason that mere receipt and retention of the premium until after the death of the deceased-applicant or even the mere preparation of the policy and its blocking would not amount to acceptance of the proposal for insurance policy. To arrive at such conclusions, it relied on the decision of this C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 7 of 35Court in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba and Ors.1. It was held that the fora below had erred in directing for payment of benefits in terms of the subject policy. 8. Various contentions were raised on behalf of the parties before us to support their rival contentions. We have already taken note of the factual contentions raised on behalf of the parties. In the light of the contentions the question to be considered is whether the NCDRC was justified in reversing the concurrent orders of the forums below and in dismissing the complaint. It is to be noted that even after dismissing the complaint NCDRC took note of the offer made by the respondent to the appellant for payment of an amount of Rs. 1 Lakh ex-gratia vide paragraph 4 (d) of the memo of the revision petition, and issued a specific direction to the respondent to pay a sum of Rs. 1 Lakh to the appellant by way of ex-gratia. Before 1 (1984) 2 SCC 719 C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 8 of 35adverting to the rival contentions and looking into the correctness or otherwise of the reversal of the concurrent orders we find it appropriate to dilate this aspect of the impugned order. 9. As noted hereinbefore, as per the impugned order the NCDRC dismissed the complaint. Therefore, the question is how can an order carrying a specific direction for payment, even by way of ex-gratia, be issued in a complaint after dismissing the same. It is to be noted that such an order was passed in a revision petition filed by the respondent herein. Jurisdiction of the NCDRC under the Act is provided under Section 21 thereof. Section 21 (a) has two Sub-clauses and Sub- clause (i) thereof deals with the original jurisdiction of NCDRC to entertain complaints and Sub-clause (ii) thereof deals with appeals against orders of the State Commission. Section 21 (b) deals with its revisional power. Section 21 of the Act reads thus: - C.A.

--- JUDGMENT 393 ---
No.270 of 2012 Page 9 of 35“21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission.— Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have jurisdiction— (a) to entertain— (i) complaints where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed exceeds [rupees one crore]; and (ii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; and (b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National Commission that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.” 10. A bare perusal of Sections 21 (a) and 21 (b) would reveal that the powers thereunder are different and distinct and the powers under Section 21 (b) is very limited. The NCDRC itself, in the decision in Kongaraananthram v. Telecom Distt. Engineer, Ma- C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 10 of 35Habubnagar2, held that its revisional powers under the said Section are very limited. The said Section provides power to call for the records from the State Commission and to set aside its order issued sans jurisdiction vested in it by law or if the State Commission failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or if the State Commission has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity. 11. As noticed hereinbefore, a specific direction was issued under the impugned order by NCDRC after dismissing the complaint which was allowed by the District Forum and got confirmance from the State Commission. It is true that what was ordered by NCDRC is not for payment of benefits based on the policy bearing No.832471906 but only payment of Rs.1 lakh by way of ex gratia, as offered in the memorandum of the revision petition. Ex gratia is an act of gratis and has no 2 1990 SCC OnLine NCDRC 24 C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 11 of 35connection with the liability, payable as a legal duty. Going by the Oxford Dictionary of Law, 5th Edition, the term “ex gratia” is payment not required to be made by a legal duty. 12.

--- JUDGMENT 394 ---
In the contextual situation, it is relevant to refer to the decision of this Court in Sudesh Dogra v. Union of India & Ors.3. This Court held therein that ex gratia is an act of gratis and it got no connection with the liability of the State under law and the very nature of the relief and its dispensation by the State could not be governed by directions in the nature of mandamus unless, of course, there is an apparent discrimination in the manner of grant of such relief. 13. In the context of the directions, it is also to be noted that such an offer was made by the Respondent much earlier even before the matter reached the District Forum, but the appellant had denied to accept such an 3 (2014) 6 SCC 486 C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 12 of 35offer. The specific direction, in such circumstances issued in exercise of the revisional power dissuade us to accept the impugned order as one dismissing the complaint in toto and in the aforesaid circumstances, the impugned order virtually partakes the character of an order modifying the order of the District Forum which was confirmed by the State Commission. Be that as it may, we will further consider the question whether the NCDRC is justified in reversing the concurrent order in the complaint filed by the appellants in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. 14. A perusal of the impugned order would reveal, as noted earlier, that the reversal of the concurrent order(s) of the forums below and the consequential rejection of the complaint made by the NCDRC after coming to a conclusion of non-existence of a concluded contract was by relying on a decision of this Court in Raja Vasireddy C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 13 of 35Komalavalli Kamba’s case (supra).

--- JUDGMENT 395 ---
Srinivas v. SBI Life Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors.4, wherein this Court distinguished the decision in Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba’s case (supra), we are of the view that NCDRC had misdirected itself in considering the relevant question involved, which was rightly considered by the District Forum. In the decision in D. Srinivas case, this Court held thus:- “12. Although we do not have any quarrel with the proposition laid therein, it should be noted that aforesaid judgments only laid down a flexible formula for the Court to see as to whether there was clear indication of acceptance of the insurance. It is to be noted that the impugned majority order merely cites the aforesaid judgment, without appreciating the circumstances which give rise to a very clear presumption of acceptance of the policy by the insurer in this case at hand. The insurance contract being a 4 (2018) 3 SCC 653 C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 15 of 35contract of utmost good faith, is a two-way door. The standards of conduct as expected under the utmost good faith obligation should be met by either party to such contract.” 16. Paragraph 11 of the decision in D. Srinivas case (supra) would reveal that the afore-quoted recital was made thereunder after considering the decision in Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba case (supra). In short, the decision in D. Srinivas case (supra) would obligate us to consider whether the circumstances obtained in this case give rise to a very clear presumption of acceptance of the policy by the insurer instead of merely giving imprimatur to the impugned order of NCDRC on the ground that it was rendered relying on the decision in Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba’s case. In this context, it is only apposite to note that though the orders were passed by the District Forum which was confirmed by the State Commission would reveal that the analysis and the consequential conclusion arrived at thereunder C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 16 of 35lie in conformity with the exercise expected to be undertaken based on the aforementioned exposition of law in D. Srinivas’s case (supra). We are not oblivious of the fact that the decision in D. Srinivas’s case (supra) was rendered much later to the order impugned in this appeal. But then, in view of the exposition of law in Murthy v. State of Karnataka & Others5 as also in view of D. Srinivas’s case (supra), if the analysis and the ultimate conclusions of the District Forum is in tune with the decision in D. Srinivas’s case, we are bound to restore the same. In Murthy’s case (supra), this Court held that normally the decision of the Supreme Court enunciating a principle of law is applicable to all cases irrespective of the stage of pendency thereof because it is assumed that what is enunciated by the Supreme Court is, in fact, the law from inception. 5 (2003) 7 SCC 517 C.A.

--- JUDGMENT 396 ---
No.270 of 2012 Page 17 of 3517. The decision in D. Srinivas’s case was followed by this Court again in the decision in Gokal Chand (D) Thr. LRs v. Axis Bank Ltd. and Anr.6, after rejecting a defence relying on the decision in Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba’s case. 18. Now, we will proceed to consider the question whether circumstances obtained in this case carry clear presumption of the acceptance of the policy by the insurer, as has been obligated under the decision in D. Srinivas’s case (supra). 19. Evidently, it is the case of the appellants that the first premium was accepted and a duly signed receipt therefor, noting policy No.832471906 was issued by the respondent on 09.07.1996. The contents of the same has been reproduced in the synopsis of this case at page ‘E’ as hereunder. 6 2022 SCC OnLine 1720 C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 18 of 35“Annexure B Dear Sir/Madam Your proposal for Assurance as per particulars noted in the schedule has been accepted by the corporation as proposed at ordinary rates/with E.D.B…………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………… We have also received amount noted in the schedule being the First Premium on the policy of assurance for the plan and amount indicated therein. The acceptance of this payment places the corporation on risk with effect from the date of this Acceptance cum First Premium Receipt or if the proposal is under the Children/Deferred or Children Anticipated Assurance Plan from the deferred date on terms & conditions of the policy of assurance which will be sent shortly. The issue of this receipt is also subject to this realisation of the amount in cash and the terms and conditions of acceptance printed over leaf. Policy will be despatched shortly, if you do not receive the same within next 90 days please write to us.” 20. The photocopy of the Acceptance-cum-First Premium Receipt is produced by the respondent along C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 19 of 35with its written submission as Annexure B. In fact, Annexure B would reveal the accuracy and correctness of what is stated at page ‘E’ of the synopsis of the captioned appeal. A perusal of the same would make it clear that the acceptance of the payment would place the Corporation to assume the risk with effect from the date of the Acceptance-cum-First Premium Receipt. True that in Annexure B, it is stated that it would be subject to the realization of the amount in cash and the terms and conditions of acceptance printed overleaf. Though this Court called upon the respondent to produce the original, the same was not produced and what was produced was only a photo copy as Annexure B. In this context, as also in view of the decision in D. Srinivas’s case, it is only appropriate to refer to certain recitals from the order of the District Forum. They, in so far as relevant, read thus:- C.A.

--- JUDGMENT 397 ---
V. Modi under Vakalatnama and produced 22 documentary evidence as stated in the list of documents including Suspense Memorandum dated 09.07.1996 and copy of the police i.e. disputed policy no. 832471906, copy of opponent's notice to call for second installment premium, copy of death certificate and policy papers and certificate C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 21 of 35issued by Police Inspector, Dholka Police Station and documents issued by the Medical Officer of Sheth G.K. Municipal Hospital and all relevant documents issued by the opponent and notice given by the complainant to the opponent dated 10.09.1996 and opponent letter dated 29.08.1996 and copy of other correspondence including notice given by Shri T.S. Nanavati dated 25.03.1997 to the opponent and notice dated 21.04.1997 notice given through Shri A.V. Modi dated 14.08.1997 to the opponent. 4. The complainant's advocate notice to the opponent on 03 .07.1998 and requested the opponent to produce required original documents and requested the opponent's authorized person Shri Mukund Krishnarao Joshi (Shri. M. K Joshi) to remain present with the said documents. In response to that Shri. M.

--- JUDGMENT 398 ---
K. Modi, due date, mode of payment half yearly, date of birth, age whether admitted: yes and all other details about BR. DO. DO code, Agent code etc are written and full address of policy holder Mr. Narendra Kumar Modi is written and office of the LI C of India has issued the legal receipt and the same original receipt is produced by the complainant along with complaint. The opponents have also produce copy of the insurance policy issued by the opponent, the policy no.832471906 all the details of commencement of policy, mode of premium, date of proposal, name. and address of proposer and life assured of Shri. Narendra Kumar Kantila Modi and full address is written and it C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 23 of 35was signed by the office of the LIC and the opponent have of commencement of policy and policy no. is written 832471906 and commencement of policy 28.06.1996 and all necessary details are stated. The State Bank of Saurashtra, Dholka Branch has issued certificate that the . cheque no. 187009 dated 8.07.1996 favoring LIC of India Rs. 3388/- drawn by Narendra Kumar Modi paid by them as on 12.07.1996. The opponent also issued first premium commission bill in the favour of Shri. P.B. Shah, the agent of the policy issued in the favour of complaint and in the said bill policy no. -· 832471906, sum insured Rs. 1.00 lakh, mode of payment, table and term, all details are stated. The said first premium commission bill issued by the opponent……………………………………..…. …………... We have to note that when policy number itself is stated in the said letter dated 29.08.1996 of disputed policy, means all procedure prior to issuance of policy were completed and then only the policy number can be allotted to the proposer and in this case when policy number was already given to the proposer, means the contract was started or concluded so the opponent cannot go back with the terms and conditions of the said contract i.e. policy no.832471906………………………………………… C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 24 of 35…………. The opponent wrote letter dated 17.06.1997 in connection of complaint's notice given through advocate dated 25.03.1997 and 21.04.1997. We have noted that the title of the letter is stated by the opponent that the title of the letter is stated by the opponent that "Re: Policy No. 832471906 addressed to Shri T.S. Nanavati, who gave two legal notices on behalf of the complainants, the opponent have shown their failings to pay exgratia payment sum insured only in full and final settlement of the dues under the aforesaid policy. At this juncture, we have to interpret the said all words used by the LIC i.e. Ex- gratia or basic sum insured only in full and final settlement of the dues under the · above policy all the said words are proving that the opponent have issued the policy and accepted the risk……………......................... …………………………….….. We have also noted that the opponent has deliberately not examined any witness to prove that the decision to accept the proposal was taken by the opponent on 15.07.1996 and the death of the proposer has taken place on 14.07.1996, the contract could not be said to have been concluded and the contract was never in existence. We have noted that the contract was already concluded prior to the death of the policy holder Shri Narendra Kumar Modi, if the opponent were and are C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 25 of 35in possession of the documentary evidence to prove that the decision to accept the proposal was taken by the opponent on 15.07.1996, then definitely, the opponent would have produced oral or documentary evidence to prove the said facts as this is a crucial point, but the opponent has not taken . any action to produce oral or documentary evidence oat this point i.e. only defense of the opponent in the written statement which amounts to crush the object of LIC act and other prevailing act to give protection and risk coverage………………………………………………… ……...………………………The opponent have not produced their own record to prove that after the receipt of the proposal and cheque of premium of Rs3388/- dated 09.07.1996, the decision to accept the proposal was not taken on 09.07.1996 or immediately within reasonable period 213 days and took only on 15.07.1996………….” 21. Obviously, the said First Premium Receipt contains the number of the policy as 832471906 and the next premium date was shown therein as 28.12.1996. In addition to the aforesaid recitals from the order of the C.A.

--- JUDGMENT 399 ---
No.270 of 2012 Page 26 of 35District Forum, we are of the view that certain other emerging aspects also assume relevance. 22. Though it is stated, as can be seen from the extracted portion, that the issue of the receipt is subject to the realization of the amount in cash and the terms and condition of acceptance printed overleaf, the printing on overleaf is conspicuously absent in Annexure B. So also, there is no case for the respondent that the cheque issued was dishonored. 23. The factum of receipt of cheque amount cannot be disputed by the respondent. In fact, the statement in the counter affidavit of the respondent in this appeal that the appellant’s entitlement is only to get refund of the amount tendered as initial deposit at the time of submitting proposal would reveal the said position. Another circumstance is also relevant in the context of consideration based on the decision in D. Srinivas’s case (supra) viz., the stand of the respondent that mere C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 27 of 35preparation of the policy document is not acceptance so as to create a concluded contract. The cheque amount was received prior to the death of ‘the deceased’ is not in dispute. Paragraph 5 of the order of the District Forum would reveal that the Dhokla Branch of the State Bank of Saurashtra issued certificate that Cheque No.187009 favouring the respondent herein for Rs.3388/- drawn by ‘the deceased’ was paid by him on 12.07.1996. The order of the State Commission in paragraph 3 would reveal the consistent stand of the respondent that the proposal form was accepted only on 15.07.1996 whereas the death of ‘the deceased’ was on the previous day viz., on 14.07.1996 and therefore, there was no concluded contract. The documents pertaining to the proposal were perused by both the District Forum and the State Commission and the said fact is discernible from their respective orders. The various documents were referred to in the orders with reference to the page C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 28 of 35numbers, in which they are available. In the said context, paragraph 6 of the orders of the State Commission assumes relevance and the same to the extent it is relevant, read thus:- “6. Page 125 is the proposal form. Perusal of the same suggests that the amount of Rs. 3,388/- is shown as deposit amount and the risk date is shown to be 28.06.1996. Thus, it will be seen that the policy was desired to be effective and risk commenced retrospectively with effect from 28.06.1996. It is also suggested that the said proposal form was filled in on 09.07.1996. Page 126 reads the same to be suspense memorandum with BOC No. 600392 dated 09 .07 .1996 and the policy of proposal number is shown as F.P. Page 130 reads that next premium would become due on 28.12.1996…….” 24. In the circumstances, referred to in the orders of the District Forum and the State Commission as also noted hereinbefore, the question is whether a clear presumption as to the acceptance of the policy by the insurer is available in the case on hand. In Annexure B C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 29 of 35receipt of the first premium, it is specifically stated that the acceptance of payment would place the Corporation on risk with effect from the date of the said Acceptance- cum-First Premium Receipt, subject to the realization of the amount in cash and the terms and conditions of acceptance printed overleaf. What is printed overleaf is not on record as the same was not produced, though it should be a part of Annexure B. Thus, the entire circumstances discussed based on the documents in the orders of the District Forum and the State Commission hereinbefore in this judgment, in the light of the decision in D. Srinivas’s case (supra) constrain us to hold that the proposal was accepted. 25. When the aforesaid being the circumstances revealed from the conclusions and concurrent findings by the District Forum and the State Commission entered with reference to the documents perused by them, in exercise of revisional power the NCDRC could not have C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 30 of 35arrived at a finding that the forums below acted in the exercise of jurisdiction illegally or that there occurred a material irregularity. In fact, all the circumstances discussed above justify the conclusion of acceptance of the proposal prior to the death of ‘the deceased’. 26. There is no case for the respondent that Annexure B viz., the First Premium Receipt carrying the assurance, as mentioned earlier, was not issued. Annexure B would justify drawing of presumption of acceptance of the policy and not otherwise. We have also found that no material irregularity or illegality could be found in the conclusions drawn with regard to the acceptance of proposal by the District Forum which was confirmed by the State Commission with reasons. We are fortified in our view by the following further reasons/ circumstances. The entry 15.07.1996 in Annexure B and the contentions that the factum of death was made known on C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 31 of 3515.07.1996 and the acceptance of policy also on 15.07.1996 cannot co-exist. If the amount received on account of encashment of cheque is kept as deposit/suspense and was not accepted by way of premium, as has been contended before the State Commission and duly recorded in paragraph 3 of its order what was the necessity to prepare the First Premium Receipt on 15.07.1996. There is incongruity in the contentions and the documents. Along with the written submission on behalf of the respondent herein, true copy of the suspense memorandum/First Premium Receipt is produced in this proceeding as Annexure B. A perusal of the same with reference to what is extracted from paragraph 6 of the order of the State Commission, would reveal certain disturbing aspects. As stated in paragraph 6 thereunder Annexure B would reveal that the date for next premium would become due on 28.12.1996. At the same time a dubious entry ‘NIL’ is also C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 32 of 35appearing thereon. Another dubious entry is the writing on the right top corner of Annexure B i.e., 15.07.1996. The dubiousness on account of that entry is because of the specific stand taken by the respondent. As noted earlier, the stand of the respondent is that the policy was prepared on 15.07.1996 and that the First Premium Receipt was issued earlier. If it be so why an entry of 15.07.1996 should be made in Annexure B. As stated in paragraph 6 of the order of the State Commission, the next premium date is shown as due as 28.12.1996. The name and address of Narendra Kumar Kantilal Modi and the policy number are also specifically entered therein. 27. In the aforesaid circumstances, there was absolutely no reason or justification for NCDRC to upturn the concurrent orders and to order for the dismissal of the complaint and at the same time issuing a direction only to grant Rs.1 lakh as ex gratia merely because such an offer was made by the respondent-insurer in the C.A. No.270 of 2012 Page 33 of 35memorandum of the revision petition. There cannot be any doubt with respect to the position that in the absence of anything suggesting that the State Commission had acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with materially irregularity, interference with an order of the State Commission confirming the order of the District Forum, in exercise of the limited revisional power under Section 21 (b) of the Act, by NCDRC, is without rhyme or reason and cannot be sustained. 28.

--- JUDGMENT 400 ---
2024 INSC 422 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2281 OF 2011 RAJENDRA S/O RAMDAS KOLHE APPELLANT(S) VERSUS STATE OF MAHARASHTRA RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T UJJAL BHUYAN, J. Heard learned counsel for the parties. 2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 15.11.2010 passed by the High Court of Judicature of Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad (hereinafter ‘the High Court’) dismissing Criminal Appeal No. 635 of 2008, Rajendra Ramdas Kolhe Vs. State of Maharashtra, filed by the appellant thereby confirming the judgment and order dated 23.07.2008 passed by the 3rd Ad Hoc Additional Sessions Judge, Ambajogai (‘trial court’ hereinafter) in Sessions Case No. 60/2006.2 2.1. It may be mentioned that by the judgment and order dated 23.07.2008, the trial court had convicted the appellant for committing an offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) and sentenced to suffer life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/- with a default stipulation. The appeal filed by the appellant against the aforesaid conviction and sentence was dismissed by the High Court.

--- JUDGMENT 401 ---
3.3. On completion of investigation, chargesheet was submitted by the police. Appellant alongwith the father-in-law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the deceased were arrayed as accused. In so far brother-in-law Suresh is concerned, he was found to be a juvenile. Therefore, his case was segregated and sent to the Juvenile Justice Board.4 3.4. In the trial of the appellant and the three others, prosecution examined in all 13 witnesses. Statements of the accused including the appellant were recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC). Stand of the defence was that it was not a case of homicide but a case of suicide. In addition to the above, appellant also tendered evidence of a doctor. 3.5. After considering the evidence on record and the rival contentions, the trial court came to the conclusion that prosecution could not prove that the accused persons in furtherance of their common intention had subjected the deceased to harassment and cruelty and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 498A IPC read with Section 34 thereof. The trial court also did not find any material against the father-in- law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the appellant for committing murder of Rekha. However, the trial court accepted the contents of both the dying declarations Ex. 59 and Ex. 65 coupled with the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and held that death of Rekha was homicidal and not accidental. While acquitting the father-in-law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the appellant, the trial court held that prosecution had established beyond5 reasonable doubt that accused No. 4 i.e. the appellant alongwith his minor brother Suresh had in furtherance of their common intention committed murder of Rekha. Therefore, the trial court held the appellant guilty of the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. After a separate hearing, the trial court sentenced the appellant as above. 4. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of conviction and sentence, appellant preferred appeal before the High Court. By the judgment and order dated 15.11.2010, the High Court relied upon the written dying declaration of the deceased Ex. 59 recorded by PW-6 and also the oral dying declarations of the deceased made before PW-2, PW-3, PW-4, PW-7 and PW-8 and thereafter upheld the judgment of conviction of the trial court. Holding that the trial court judgment warranted no interference, the appeal was dismissed. 5. This Court by order dated 16.08.2011 had issued notice. Thereafter vide order dated 02.10.2011, leave was granted. However, prayer for bail was rejected at that stage. 6. By order dated 30.06.2016, this Court noted that appellant had already undergone about nine years of sentence.6 Therefore, the sentence was suspended and bail was granted to the appellant. 7. Learned senior counsel for the appellant strenuously argued that there are material contradictions in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. That apart, the High Court had rightly not relied upon Ex. 65 i.e. the dying declaration recorded by the Special Executive Magistrate as that was not proved. In so far Ex. 59 dying declaration is concerned, he submits that PW-12, the doctor, had given the time of recording the dying declaration as 11:45PM, both as the starting point as well as the time of conclusion which is a significant lacuna. It casts a serious doubt about the credibility of the declaration. He submits that since the courts below had discarded the theory of domestic violence, there could be no other reason for the appellant to commit murder of his wife. As a matter of fact, it has come on record that the appellant had tried to save the deceased and in the process had got burnt on his right hand. He had taken the deceased alongwith his brother to the hospital. That being the position, the conviction and sentence is liable to be interfered with. 7.1. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent supports the conviction and sentence of the appellant. He submits7 that the evidence on record clearly establishes beyond any reasonable doubt the guilt of the appellant. Prosecution could successfully prove the guilt of the appellant beyond any reasonable doubt. The dying declaration Ex. 59 is too significant to be overlooked. Minor discrepancies here and there cannot impeach the prosecution case. Therefore, there is no reason to interfere with the judgment of conviction as affirmed by the High Court. The appeal should be dismissed. 8. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received the due consideration of the Court. 9. At the outset, it would be apposite to dilate on the evidence tendered by the material prosecution witnesses before we proceed to the written dying declaration Ex. 59.

--- JUDGMENT 402 ---
10. PW-2 is Rajendra, a police constable. In his examination in chief, he stated that the deceased was serving as a lady police constable at Ambajogai Police Station. She was residing in a quarter in the police colony in front of his quarter. On the date and time of the incident, he saw many ladies residing in the police colony standing near the quarter of the deceased alongwith a few police constables. PW-2 went there and made enquiries. One constable Rajgire, who was his neighbour, told him that husband8 and brother-in-law of Rekha had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. She was taken to the S.R.T.R. Hospital at Ambajogai for treatment. Thereafter PW-2 alongwith Sayyed Aslam went to the hospital and saw Rekha taking treatment in the OPD. Police constable Sayyed Chand was present in the OPD. He asked Rekha in the presence of PW-2 and his friend as to how she had sustained the burn injuries. Rekha told that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. According to her, she got married about two years ago. She was treated properly for about 15 days. Thereafter, her father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law used to instigate her husband whenever he used to come home on leave from the army. They used to tell him that she was retaining her entire salary instead of handing over the same to her in-laws. They also raised questions on her character which was cited as the reason for not handing over her salary to them. On such instigation, the husband used to abuse and assault her. 10.1. Though she was selected for the police sports competition at Beed on 14.07.2002, her husband did not allow her to participate in the sports competition. On the day of the incident, she was not allowed to come out of the house for the whole day.9 Between 08:30PM to 09:00PM, her husband and brother-in-law tied her hands with a gamcha; they also tied her legs with a towel. The brother-in-law brought a bottle of kerosene and a matchbox and gave to the husband. Thereafter, her husband gagged her mouth by one hand and poured kerosene on her person by the other hand. The husband then lighted the matchstick from the matchbox and set her on fire. 10.2. PW-2 stated that when he had gone to the hospital, the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were not present. 10.3. In his cross-examination, PW-2 stated that in his statement before the police, it was not recorded that the in-laws of Rekha had told her husband that she was not paying the salary for which Rekha was abused and assaulted. In the statement under Section 161 CrPC, it was also not recorded that Rekha was selected for the police sports competition on 14.07.2022. The statement made by him that Rekha’s husband i.e. the appellant had closed her mouth by one hand and poured kerosene by the other hand, was also found not mentioned in the Section 161 statement. However, he stated that PW-6 Assistant Sub Inspector Dake had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail in the hospital when PW-2 was present.10 11. PW-3 Kausalyabai is the mother of the deceased Rekha. She stated that after marriage, Rekha was properly treated by her husband and other in-laws for about 15 days. Thereafter, they started ill-treating her on the ground that she did not part with her salary. Her elder daughter Shyamla had telephoned her and told her that Rekha was set on fire by her husband Rajendra and her brother-in-law Suresh. She came to the hospital at Ambajogai along with her son and daughter-in-law and met Rekha. Rekha told PW-3 that her husband and brother-in-law had poured kerosene and set her on fire. At that time, her mother-in-law, father-in-law and sister-in-law were present. Rekha had told her that her neighbours had shifted her to the hospital while her husband and in-laws fled away. 11.1. In her cross-examination, she stated that police had recorded her statement after the death of Rekha. She acknowledged that police had not recorded in her Section 161 statement that her daughter Rekha was subjected to cruelty by her husband and in-laws; and on the day of the incident, she was confined to the house. It was also not recorded that accused Rajendra and Suresh had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. She had not stated before the police when Rekha’s husband and11 brother-in-law had set her on fire; that father-in-law and sister-in- law were also present and that all of them ran away. According to her, though she had stated before the police that all the accused were present in the house and after setting Rekha on fire, all of them fled from the house, the same was not recorded. 12. Brother of the deceased, Milind, is PW-4. In his examination-in-chief, he stated that the in laws, brother-in-law and sister-in-law of deceased Rekha had suspected her character. They used to incite the appellant about the character of the deceased and non-sharing of her salary with them. He stated that husband and brother-in-law of Rekha had killed her by setting her on fire. When he came to know about the incident, he alongwith his wife, children and mother came to Ambajogai on the same night i.e. on 22.07.2002 and met Rekha in the hospital. When he made enquiries with her, she told him that her husband and brother-in- law had set her on fire. In the hospital, none of her in-laws were present. On their arrival in the hospital, PW-4 found his sister Shyamla near Rekha. While taking treatment, Rekha died on 24.07.2002. 12.1. In his cross-examination, he stated that when he had gone to the hospital, his sister (the deceased) was completely burnt12 and was groaning. He stated that the police had recorded his statement as per his say. Though he had stated before the police that in the hospital, his sister Rekha had informed him that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire, he could not assign any reason why the police did not record the same. 13. We may now turn to the evidence of PW-7, Sayyed Chand, who was also a policeman serving in the Ambajogai Police Station and residing in the police colony. In his evidence-in-chief, he stated that at about 09:00 PM, he heard hue and cry in the colony. When he came out of his house, he saw people gathered near the quarter of lady police constable Dhokne i.e. the deceased. Police head constable Rajgire and women members in the crowd informed him that lady police constable Dhokne was set on fire by her husband and her brother-in-law. He and Rajgire entered into the house of Dhokne and extinguished the fire. Both the hands of Rekha were tied by a towel. Rajgire untied the hands. At that time, the husband and brother-in-law were present in the house. Somebody brought an auto-rikshaw in which Dhokne, her husband and brother-in-law went to the hospital. He went to the hospital on the motorcycle of another person whose name he did not know. But when he reached the hospital, the husband and13 brother-in-law were not present. He got Dhokne (Rekha) admitted in the hospital. When he enquired with Dhokne (Rekha), she told him that her mother-in-law and father-in-law had told her husband that she was not behaving properly and was not sharing her salary with them. Therefore, her husband and brother-in-law set her on fire.

--- JUDGMENT 403 ---
13.1. In his cross-examination, PW-7 stated that police had recorded his statement on 23.07.2002 in the morning at the police station. According to him, though he had stated before the police that he and Rajgire had entered the house of Dhokne where they found her hands and legs were tied by a towel, whereafter they had extinguished the fire while Rajgire untied the hands and legs of Rekha, the same was not reduced to writing by the police. He had also stated that at that time, the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were present in the house but this was also not recorded by the police. His statement that Rekha’s mother-in-law and father- in-law used to inform her husband that she was not behaving properly, was also not recorded by the police. 14. Police head constable Rajgire is PW-8. In his examination-in-chief, he stated that as he was serving in the Ambajogai Police Station, he used to reside in the police colony.14 22.07.2002 was his weekly holiday. Therefore, he was at home. The quarter of Rekha Dhokne, lady police constable, was in front of his quarter in the police colony. On 22.07.2002, between 08:30PM to 09:00PM, he heard cries of a lady from the house of Dhokne. On hearing the cries, he and his wife came out of his house and entered the house of Dhokne. At that time, Dhokne was completely burnt. He and his wife poured water on her person and extinguished the fire. At that time, husband and brother-in-law of Rekha Dhokne were standing near the door of the house. Rekha was saying loudly that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire. When somebody brought an auto-rikshaw, her husband and brother-in-law took her to the S.R.T.R. Hospital in the said auto rikshaw. On 24.07.2002, Rekha Dhokne died while taking treatment in the hospital. His supplementary statement was recorded by the police on 25.07.2002. According to him, he had learnt that the in-laws of Rekha were demanding that she should part with her salary and since she was unwilling to do that, she was set on fire. 14.1. In his cross-examination, PW-8 stated that though he had told the police that when he and his wife had extinguished the fire, the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were present near15 the door of the house, this is not reflected in his police statement. However, his statement that when his wife was pouring water on the person of Dhokne, husband Rajendra and brother-in-law Suresh were standing nearby, was recorded in his statement under Section 161 CrPC 15.

--- JUDGMENT 404 ---
PW-10 is Uttam, the police inspector, who had investigated the case. He stated that he had visited the crime scene alongwith two panchas. He had seized half burnt parker petticoat, gown, one water bottle smelling of kerosene, one half burnt stick, broken mangalsutra, lock etc. The seizure list was prepared by him and signed by the panchas. 15.1. In his cross-examination, he stated that on receiving information from the medical officer of the hospital that Rekha Dhokne had sustained burn injuries, he had directed PW-6 to record the dying declaration of her, entry of which was made in the station diary. In so far the Section 161 statement of PW-2 is concerned, he stated that PW-2 did not state before him that Rekha had told him that her husband had gagged her mouth by one hand and had poured kerosene on her person by the other hand. Regarding the Section 161 statement of PW-3, he stated that PW-3 did not say that the accused were demanding money from16 Rekha and that they were subjecting her to cruelty by not providing her food, confining her to the house and on the day of the incident, accused Rajendra and Suresh had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. He further stated that PW-3 Kausalyabai had not stated in her Section 161 statement that Shyamla had informed her that accused Rajendra and his brother Suresh had killed Rekha by setting her on fire. Further, PW-3 did not say before him that all the accused ran away from the house after setting Rekha on fire. Regarding PW-4, he stated that PW-4 in his Section 161 statement did not mention that his sister Rekha had told him that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire. As regards PW-7 Sayyed Chand, PW-10 stated that PW-7 did not state in his Section 161 statement that he and Rajgire had entered into the house of Dhokne, that both her legs and hands were tied by a towel and that they had extinguished the fire. PW-7 did not say that Rajgire had untied the legs and hands of Rekha and at that time her husband and brother-in-law were present. PW-7 also did not state that Rajgire and the women members in the crowd had informed him that Rekha’s husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire. PW-8 in her Section 161 statement, also did not say17 that the husband and brother-in-law were present at the time when Rekha was burning. 16.

--- JUDGMENT 405 ---
Dr. Kiran Kurkure is PW-13. At the relevant point of time, he was serving as medical officer in the S.R.T.R. Medical College and Hospital at Ambajogai. At about 10:15PM on 22.07.2002, a patient by the name Rekha, wife of Rajendra Kolhe, was brought to the hospital by the police. Though she was having 99% burns, she was conscious. Her statement was recorded at 11:45PM. At that time, he was present. He stated that at the time of recording of her statement, the patient Rekha was conscious and was in a position to give statement. He further stated that he had put an endorsement on the statement (Ex. 59). It also bore his endorsement to the effect that the patient was fit for giving statement at present which was signed by him. He stated that the contents of Ex. 59 were correct. He proved his endorsements and the signatures on Ex. 59. He also stated that he had put an endorsement before recording the statement and another endorsement after recording the statement; the endorsement date and time was in his handwriting. Regarding the second endorsement after recording of the statement, he stated that the endorsement was his but by mistake he had mentioned the time19 as 11:45PM. He also stated that at the time of admission of the patient, he had recorded the history narrated by her. The patient had informed him that her husband had set her on fire. He asserted that he had correctly recorded the history as narrated by the patient. It was in his own handwriting, the contents of which were proved by him (Ex. 117).

--- JUDGMENT 406 ---
19. In his evidence-in-chief, PW-2 stated that constable Rajgire was in the crowd in front of the residence of Rekha and that he had told him that the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha had set her on fire by pouring kerosene on her person. While Rekha was undergoing treatment in the hospital, constable Sayyed Chand asked her in the presence of PW-2 as to how she had sustained the burn injuries. In response, Rekha stated that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire by pouring20 kerosene. She had further stated that her in-laws used to instigate her husband whenever he used to come home on leave from the army, raising question marks over her character and citing that as the reason for not parting with her salary. This would be enough for the husband to abuse and assault her which ultimately led to the incident in question. However, in his cross-examination, PW-2 admitted that police had not included in his Section 161 statement that the in-laws of Rekha had told her husband that she was not handing over her salary to them for which Rekha was abused and assaulted. It was also not mentioned in the statement under Section 161 CrPC that the appellant had gagged the mouth of Rekha by one hand and poured kerosene on her person by the other hand. However, he stated that he was present in the hospital when PW-6 had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail (Ex. 59).

--- JUDGMENT 407 ---
19.1. Likewise, in her cross-examination, PW-3 admitted that it was not mentioned in her statement recorded under Section 161 CrPC that her daughter Rekha was subjected to cruelty by her husband and in-laws. It was also not recorded that Rekha was confined to the house on the day of the incident. She had also not stated before the police that Rekha’s husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire.21 19.2. Similarly, in the statement of PW-4 recorded under Section 161 CrPC, there was no mention that Rekha had informed him that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire. 19.3. There was also no mention in the statement of PW-7 before the police that he and Rajgire had entered the house of Rekha where they found her legs and hands were tied by a towel whereafter they had extinguished the fire and untied her. The said statement also did not contain that husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were present in the house while she was burning. It was also not recorded that the mother-in-law and father-in-law used to inform the husband that Rekha was not behaving properly. 19.4. In his cross-examination, PW-8 admitted that he did not mention in his statement under Section 161 CrPC that when PW-8 and his wife had extinguished the fire, the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were present near the door of the house. However, it was mentioned that when his wife was pouring water on the person of Rekha, her husband and brother-in-law were standing nearby. 19.5. The above improvements in evidence by the prosecution witnesses were brought on record during the cross-examination of22 PW-10, the investigating officer. Therefore, in addition to certain contradictions here and there, there is clear improvement in the version of the prosecution witnesses when they tendered evidence before the court. However, even in his cross-examination, PW-2 stated that PW-6 had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail in the hospital. This now brings us to the statement of Rekha made in the hospital which was recorded by PW-6 i.e. Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 408 ---
59. While examining Ex.59, we will also analyze the evidence of PW-12 and PW-13. 20. In Ex.59, the deceased had stated that she was appointed as lady police constable in the police department on 12.12.1996. About three months prior to the date of the incident, she got transferred to the Ambajogai Police Station. She had married the appellant about two years ago. Appellant was employed in the army and posted at Jodhpur. About eight days prior to the date of the incident, he had come home on leave of fifteen days. She used to stay alongwith her in-laws in a quarter in the police colony at Ambajogai. After marriage, she was treated well for only about fifteen days. Thereafter, her mother-in-law and brother-in-law accused her of bad behaviour and suspected her character. She was subjected to verbal and physical abuse. The in-23 laws demanded that she should handover her salary to them. When she declined, they would harass and abuse her as to why she needed her salary. The brother-in-law would instigate her other in-laws and her husband(appellant) as and when he was at home on leave that she was behaving badly for which the appellant should leave her. Because of such instigation, the husband(appellant) used to beat her. Though she was selected for the police sports competition at Beed, appellant refused to allow her to participate therein. 20.1. On 22.07.2002, appellant and her brother-in-law Suresh did not allow the deceased to go out of the house. Confining her to the house, she was physically assaulted. In the evening, they tied her legs with a towel and her hands with a gamcha. While her husband gagged her mouth, the brother-in-law got a matchbox and a bottle of kerosene. The husband poured the kerosene all over her body and lit a matchstick which set her ablaze. Her gown got burnt and, in the process, she suffered severe burns. At that time, the right hand of her husband(appellant) also got burnt. 20.2. When she screamed, the husband and brother-in-law opened the door and ran away. Somehow, she could come outside.24 Then, people who had gathered outside her house extinguished the flames, put her in an auto and took her to the hospital. 21. PW-6 was serving as Assistant Sub-Inspector in the Ambajogai Police Station. He was on duty on 22.07.2002. In his evidence, he stated that the Police Station Officer of the police station had asked him to record the statement of Rekha who was admitted in the S.R.T.R. Hospital for burns. He made inquiries with the nurses serving in the burn ward where Rekha was being treated. He had visited the hospital at about 11:30 PM. Within 5 to 10 minutes, he started recording the statement of Rekha. Before recording the statement, he had requested the nurses to call the doctor whereafter Dr. Kiran Kurkure, PW-13, came. PW-13 examined Rekha and certified that she was in a position to give her statement. Thereafter, PW-6 recorded the statement of Rekha. But before recording her statement, he ensured that Rekha was in a position to give the statement. In his evidence, he narrated what Rekha had told him and what he had recorded. He stated that he had correctly recorded the statement of Rekha as per her say. He had read over the contents of the statement narrated by her and recorded by him to Rekha and she said that those were correct. As she was unable to sign or put her thumb impression because she25 was severely burnt, PW-6 obtained the toe impression of her right leg. PW-13 had put his endorsements with signatures both prior to recording her statement and at the conclusion of her statement. Thereafter, PW-6 put his signature on both the pages. In his evidence, he proved the statement of Rekha which was shown to him. 22. PW-12 Dr. Prashant Kedari stated in his evidence that the two endorsements and signatures on Ex. 59 were that of Dr. Kiran Kurkure, PW-13. 23. PW-13 in his evidence stated that the statement of Rekha was recorded at 11:45 PM and he was present. Rekha was conscious and was in a position to give her statement. He proved his two endorsements and signatures below the endorsements. He also proved the correctness of the contents of Ex. 59. He explained that in the second endorsement, he had mentioned the time as 11:45 PM by mistake. He also asserted that at the time of admission of Rekha in the hospital, he had recorded the medical history narrated by Rekha. He proved the contents thereof (Ex.

--- JUDGMENT 409 ---
From the above, it is evident that in her dying declaration (Ex. 59) Rekha clearly stated about the role played by26 the husband (appellant) and the brother-in-law in the incident which led to her burn injuries. The contents of the dying declaration have been proved by PW-6, PW-12 and PW-13. Though there are certain inconsistencies in their evidence, it is quite natural. Moreover, those are not material and do not affect the sub-stratum of her statement. The incident had occurred on 22.07.2002 with the dying declaration recorded on the same day within a couple of hours whereas the evidence was tendered in court by the above witnesses after 5 years. Such inconsistencies are bound to be there. In fact, identical statements by the material witnesses may create doubt in the mind of the court about the credibility of such evidence, as being tutored. That being the position, we are inclined to accept the dying declaration of the deceased (Ex. 59) as a valid piece of evidence. 25. The law relating to dying declaration is now well settled. Once a dying declaration is found to be authentic inspiring confidence of the court, then the same can be relied upon and can be the sole basis for conviction without any corroboration. However, before accepting such a dying declaration, court must be satisfied that it was rendered voluntarily, it is consistent and credible and that it is devoid of any tutoring. Once such a27 conclusion is reached, a great deal of sanctity is attached to a dying declaration and as said earlier, it can form the sole basis for conviction. 26. Section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with dying declaration. Since the said provision is relevant, it is extracted hereunder: [32.] Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant. – Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:- (1) When it relates to cause of death. – When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person’s death comes into question. Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question. 26.1. Section 32 says that statements made by a person who is dead or who cannot be found etc., be it in written form or oral,28 are themselves relevant facts. As per situation(1), when the relevant facts relate to the cause of death, such a statement would be relevant whether the person who made it was or was not at the time of making the statement under expectation of death. Such a statement would be relevant whatever may be the nature of the proceedings in which the cause of his death comes into question. The relevancy is not confined to the cause of his death but also to the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. 27.

--- JUDGMENT 410 ---
In Khushal Rao vs. State of Bombay1, this Court examined the principles governing acceptance of dying declaration. After examining the relevant provisions of the Evidence Act and various judicial pronouncements, this Court laid down the following conclusions: (i) it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated; (ii) each case must be determined on its own facts, keeping in view the circumstances in which the dying declaration was made; 1 AIR 1958 SC 2229 (iii) it cannot be laid down as a general proposition that a dying declaration is a weaker kind of evidence than other pieces of evidence; (iv) a dying declaration stands on the same footing as another piece of evidence. It has to be judged in the light of surrounding circumstances and with reference to the principles governing weighing of evidence; (v) a dying declaration which has been recorded by a competent Magistrate in the proper manner stands on a much higher footing than a dying declaration which depends upon oral testimony which may suffer from all the infirmities of human memory and human character; (vi) in order to test the reliability of a dying declaration, the court has to keep in view various circumstances including the condition of the person concerned to make such a statement; that it has been made at the earliest opportunity and was not the result of tutoring by interested parties.30 28. The above conclusions were reiterated by this Court in Paniben (Smt.) vs. State of Gujarat2. This Court declared that there is neither any rule of law nor of prudence that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon without corroboration. However, the court has to scrutinize the dying declaration carefully and must ensure that the declaration is not the result of tutoring, prompting or imagination; the deceased should be in a fit and proper state to make the declaration. But once the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and voluntary, it can base conviction on it without corroboration. 29. This Court highlighted the significance of a dying declaration in Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam vs. State of Andhra Pradesh3. The general rule is that hearsay evidence is not admissible. Unless the evidence tendered is tested by cross- examination, it is not creditworthy. However, Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act is an exception to this general rule. This Court observed as under: 18. * * * * * A dying declaration made by person on the verge of his death has a special sanctity as at that solemn moment, a person is most unlikely to make any untrue statement. The shadow of 2 (1992) 2 SCC 474 3 (1993) 2 SCC 68431 impending death is by itself the guarantee of the truth of the statement made by the deceased regarding the causes or circumstances leading to his death. A dying declaration, therefore, enjoys almost a sacrosanct status, as a piece of evidence, coming as it does from the mouth of the deceased victim. Once the statement of the dying person and the evidence of the witnesses testifying to the same passes the test of careful scrutiny of the courts, it becomes a very important and a reliable piece of evidence and if the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and free from any embellishment such a dying declaration, by itself, can be sufficient for recording conviction even without looking for any corroboration. * * * * * 30. Elaborating further, this Court in Sher Singh vs. State of Punjab4 held that acceptability of a dying declaration is greater because the declaration is made in extremity. When a party is on the verge of death, one rarely finds any motive to tell falsehood. It is for this reason that the requirements of oath and cross- examination are dispensed with in the case of a dying declaration. 31.

--- JUDGMENT 411 ---
State of Madhya Pradesh5, this Court observed thus: 20. The “dying declaration” is the last statement made by a person at a stage when he is in serious apprehension of his death and expects no chances of his survival. At such time, it is expected that a person will speak the truth and only the truth. Normally in such situations the courts attach the 4 (2008) 4 SCC 265 5 (2012) 7 SCC 56932 intrinsic value of truthfulness to such statement. Once such statement has been made voluntarily, it is reliable and is not an attempt by the deceased to cover up the truth or falsely implicate a person, then the courts can safely rely on such dying declaration and it can form the basis of conviction. More so, where the version given by the deceased as dying declaration is supported and corroborated by other prosecution evidence, there is no reason for the courts to doubt the truthfulness of such dying declaration. 32. When there are more than one dying declaration, this Court in Amol Singh vs. State of Madhya Pradesh6, clarified that it is not the plurality of the dying declarations that matter. On the contrary, it is the reliability of a dying declaration which is significant. If there are inconsistencies between one dying declaration and the other, the court has to examine the nature of the inconsistencies, i.e., whether those are material or not. 33. In Lakhan vs. State of Madhya Pradesh7, this Court held that where there are multiple dying declarations with inconsistencies between them, the court would have to scrutinize the facts very carefully and, thereafter, take a decision as to which of the declarations is worth reliance. 6 (2008) 5 SCC 468 7 (2010) 8 SCC 51433 34. Again, in Ashabai vs. State of Maharashtra8, this Court observed that when there are multiple dying declarations, each dying declaration has to be separately assessed and evaluated independently on their own merit as to the evidentiary value of each. One cannot be rejected merely because of certain variations in the other.

--- JUDGMENT 412 ---
35. As already discussed above, there is no reason for us to doubt the correctness of the dying declaration of the deceased (Ex. 59) which has been proved in evidence. Attending doctor has certified that the deceased was capable of narrating her statement. The substance of the dying declaration is also borne out by the medical history of the patient recorded by the doctor which has also been proved in evidence. Further, though there are inconsistencies and improvements in the version of the prosecution witnesses, there is however convergence with the core of the narration of the deceased made in the dying declaration and the medical history recorded by the doctor. That being the position, the evidence on record, particularly Ex. 59, clearly establishes the guilt of the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt. 8 (2013) 2 SCC 22434 36. We are mindful of the fact that appellant is on bail since the year 2016. Nevertheless, having sieved through the evidence carefully, we have no hesitation in our mind that appellant is guilty of committing the offence and that the guilt has been proved beyond all reasonable doubt. 37.

--- JUDGMENT 413 ---
5. The appellants moved the National Green Tribunal with the grievance that though in terms of the Notification dated 14 September 2006 of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, an Environmental Clearance is required for the construction of an airport, the site has been cleared of shade trees and tea bushes despite the absence of such a clearance. The Appellant raised concerns regarding: (i) extensive eviction leading to uprooting of 41,95,909 tea bushes, over 10,000 shade trees, and land acquisition in two divisions of the Tea Estate; (ii) ongoing site clearance of 325 hectares with massive uprooting and felling; (iii) imposition of Section 144 CrPC during eviction, utilizing 1050 bulldozers and excavators to clear 2500 bighas for the airport; (iv) the airport project being Category-A, with site clearance already underway without prior Environmental Clearance, violating EIA Notification, 2006. Additionally, the proposed Airport falls under Category 'A', necessitating scoping, public consultation as per EIA Notification, 2006; however, post-eviction, no "public" remains for consultation in affected areas. 6. The National Green Tribunal2, by its order dated 25 January 2024, dismissed the OA. The NGT held that an Environmental Impact Assessment Report was awaited and the Environmental Clearance for the airport has not been granted. Yet it held that the 2 NGT3 plea of the appellants for an order of restraint on the grant of site clearances and in principle approvals was without merit at that stage. The NGT also observed that the mere inclusion of a clause under the head 'Environment Clearances' in the form of said Notification does not deem the same to be mandatory for purposes of the EIA assessment study. 7.

--- JUDGMENT 414 ---
The Appeals were taken up by this Court on 22 April 2024. The Petitioners have been represented by Mr Prashant Bhushan. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General appears for the respondents. Mr Gopal Sankaranarayan, senior counsel has appeared for the intervenors. It is an admitted position that an Environmental Clearance is required for the project of setting up the airport and no such clearance has been issued. Paragraph 2 of the Notification dated 14 September 2006 is in the following terms: “2. Requirements of prior Environmental Clearance (EC): The following projects or activities shall require prior environmental clearance from the concerned regulatory authority, which shall hereinafter referred to be as the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests for matters falling under Category 'A' in the Schedule and at State level the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) for matters falling under Category 'B' in the said Schedule, before any construction work, or preparation of land by the project management except for securing the land, is started on the project or activity: (i) All new projects or activities listed in the Schedule to this notification; (ii) Expansion and modernization of existing projects or activities listed in the Schedule to this notification with addition of capacity beyond the limits specified for the concerned sector, that is, projects or activities which cross the threshold limits given in the Schedule, after expansion or modernization;4 (iii) Any change in product - mix in an existing manufacturing unit included in Schedule beyond the specified range.” The construction of airports in item 7(a) of the Schedule. 8.

--- JUDGMENT 415 ---
By the order of this Court dated 22 April 2024, the Secretary of the District Legal Services Authority, Cachar was directed to visit the site and submit a report to this Court on: (i) Whether any felling of shade trees had taken place; (ii) Whether any eviction at the site had taken place; and (iii) The nature of the activities which have been carried out at the site. 9. At this stage, it would be material to note that contrary to the assertions of the appellants, on 22 April 2024, an affidavit was filed by the Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam in the General Administration Department stating that: (i) there has been no felling of shade trees at the site in question; (ii) no eviction of individuals or households had taken place from the land under consideration since the tract was not inhabited; and (iii) removal of tea bushes “occurs routinely even as part of regular tea cultivation” for which no environmental clearance is required. Annexed to the affidavit is a letter dated 22 April 2024 (issued on the same date as the affidavit) by the Member Secretary of the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority, Assam to the Member Secretary, SEIAA, Assam in the following terms : “Inviting reference to the subject cited above, this is to inform you that the matter has been referred by the Special Chief5 Secretary (Environment & Forest), Govt. of Assam, inviting comments / opinion as to the requirement of prior Environmental Clearance (EC) for clearance of Tea bushes, uprooting /removal of shade / cover crops in respect of Doloo Tea Estate. On careful perusal of the averments made in the instant petition, it is to be stated herein that cultivation of Tea in Assam is falling within the category of Special Cultivation for which the Govt. of Assam / District Commissioner allot land within the ambit of Rules under the Assam Land and Revenue Regulation, 1886. It is pertinent to point out here that in a tea garden, tea bushes and shade trees are removed and uprooted in regular intervals once the trees grow old and there is loss of production of tea. Generally, Siris tree species (Albizia lebbeck/albizzia procera) which are fast growing indigenous species of trees in Assam, are planted as shade trees/cover crops and primarily used to meet the requirement of fuel wood for workers in the tea gardens. As per the Assam Tea Garden Act / Policy, clearing of tea bushes and shade trees are permissible. Moreover, tea bushes are considered as agricultural crops (Special Cultivation) and uprooting activity of such tea bushes and shade trees do not fall under any of the project / activity to the Schedule of the EIA Notification S.O. 1533(E) Dated 14.09.2006.

--- JUDGMENT 416 ---
This is submitted for favour of your kind perusal and needful action.” 10. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, Ms Salma Sultana, a judge in the district judiciary in the State of Assam, posted as Secretary to the District Legal Services Authority Kachar submitted a report dated 27 April 2024. The report, inter alia, indicates that 89 shade trees were found to be cut. Ms Sultana has also stated that “the entire area is mostly a dense forest, therefore, other possible cut down shade trees were not visible due to dense forest and thick bushes”. The report also indicates that according to the statement of the Circle Officer, Shri Arunjyoti Das, 41,95,909 tea bushes have been uprooted. 11. The Secretary of the District Legal Services Authority recorded statements on oath of witnesses who were tea garden workers, the Garden Manager, Circle Officer and6 Patwari among other persons. Several witnesses who were examined by the officer appointed by this Court have stated that: (i) tea bushes were uprooted from Doloo Tea Estate Airport site with the help of JCBs in the month of May 2022; (ii) the entire operation took place over three days and involved the use of about 200 to 250 JCBs ‘day and night’; (iii) shade trees were cut and uprooted; and (iv) during the operation the inhabitants were prevented from moving out of their homes. 12. The Court must take cognizance of the fact that the statements of these witnesses have not been tested on the anvil of cross-examination. At the same time, at this stage, it would prima facie appear that these statements would match with the statement of the Circle Officer to the effect that 41,95,909 tea bushes have been uprooted. 13. The contention of the State Government in the affidavit, which was tendered before this Court on 22 April 2024, was that tea bushes are removed routinely “even as a part of regular tea cultivation” for which no prior Environmental Clearance is required. To support this submission, reliance was placed on the communication of the Member Secretary of the SEAC in Assam which also records that in a tea garden tea bushes and shade trees are removed and uprooted at regular intervals once the trees grow old and there is a loss of production of tea. The letter dated 22 April 2024 is a self- serving document prepared on the same date as the affidavit.7 14. What warrants attention, however, is that in the present case, the clearance of the site cannot be unequivocally attributed to the cultivation activities of the tea estate. The clearance was evidently not a part of the regular maintenance of the tea estate but to facilitate the proposed new airport. The Solicitor General sought to urge that the possession of the site was handed over in June 2022 and hence the destruction of the vegetation in May 2022 was not by the respondents but likely by the inhabitants. It is inconceivable that an organized operation involving over 200-250 JCBs was done at the behest of the tea garden workers. Moreover, it has emerged that on 11 May 2022 orders were issued by the District Magistrate under Section 144 CrPC. This was a prelude to the organized activities which took place in the month of May 2022, as recorded in the statements appended to the report of the DLSA. The affidavit of the Joint Secretary to the State government has been rather liberal with the truth by suppressing the actual state of facts.

--- JUDGMENT 417 ---
15. Paragraph 2 of the notification dated 14 September 2006 requires prior Environmental Clearance “before any construction work or preparation of land by the project management is carried out except for the securing of land”. The nature of the activities which were carried out at the site was evidently of an extensive nature and is in breach of paragraph 2 of the notification. 16. There was a complete abdication of adjudicatory duties by the NGT to verify the authenticity of the grievance of the appellants. As an expert body which has been formed under a statute enacted by the Parliament, in the interest of the preservation of the environment, it was first and foremost the duty of the Tribunal to verify the authenticity of the grievance of the appellants.8 17. The Tribunal, however, simply dismissed the OA having come to the conclusion that no Environmental Clearance had been issued. If the Tribunal were to enquire into the matter even on a prima facie assessment, the facts which have emerged before this Court would have come on the record. The perfunctory dismissal of the case by the NGT not only reflects a lack of due diligence but also demonstrates a disregard for the gravity of the environmental concerns raised by the appellants. This casual, if not callous, approach to adjudication not only undermines the integrity of the judicial process but also compromises the very purpose for which the NGT was established – to safeguard the environment, ensure sustainable development and facilitate the effective and expeditious disposal of cases related to the protection and conservation of the environment, forests, and other natural resources. Such negligence on the part of the Tribunal sets a concerning precedent, eroding public trust in the efficacy of environmental governance mechanisms. 18. The State Government has filed an application for directions before this Court seeking the initiation of proceedings against the appellants allegedly for having misled this Court into passing of the order dated 22 April 2024. During the course of the hearing, the Solicitor General has stated that the application is not being pressed. 19. From the material which has been placed on the record, we are clearly of the view that the authorities, in the present case, have acted in violation of the provisions contained in Para 2 of the notification dated 14 September 2006 by carrying out an extensive clearance at the site even in the absence of an Environmental Clearance. 20. The State Government has emphasised the need for establishing a civilian airport at Silchar which has led to the proposal to set up a Greenfield Airport on land9 admeasuring 335 hectares to which an additional component of 69 hectares has been added. The decision on whether an airport is situated at a particular place is a matter of policy. However, when the law prescribes specific norms for carrying out activities requiring an Environmental Clearance, those provisions have to be strictly complied with. 21. Environmental regulations are in place precisely to ensure that developmental projects, such as the establishment of airports, are undertaken in a manner that minimizes adverse ecological impacts and safeguards the well-being of both the environment and local communities. While acknowledging the importance of infrastructure development, it is paramount that such projects proceed in harmony with environmental laws to prevent irreparable damage to ecosystems and biodiversity. The requirement for Environmental Clearance serves as a crucial safeguard against unchecked exploitation of natural resources and helps uphold the principles of sustainable development- which safeguards the interests of both present and future generations. Therefore, while the decision to establish an airport may serve broader policy objectives, it must be executed within the confines of legal frameworks designed to protect the environment and ensure responsible resource management. Failure to adhere to these norms not only undermines the integrity of environmental governance but also risks long-term environmental degradation and societal discord. 22. Setting up an airport is specifically within the ambit of Entry 7 of the Schedule to the notification dated 14 September 2006. Admittedly, no Environmental clearance has been issued till date. Development has to be in conformity with environmental10 standards prescribed by the law. 23. In consequence, there shall be a direction that absolutely no activity shall be carried out in breach of the provisions of the Notification dated 14 September 2006 at the site of the proposed greenfield airport at Silchar. 24. In the event that any application for the grant of Environmental Clearance has been filed or is filed hereafter, the processing of the application shall take place on the basis of the condition of the site as it existed prior to the date on which the illegal clearance of the tea bushes and shade trees took place in the proposed site of the greenfield airport. 25. In the above view of the matter, we allow the Appeals and set aside the impugned order of the National Green Tribunal dated 25 January 2024. 26. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. …...…...….......………………....…CJI. [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] …...…...….......………………....…..J. [J B Pardiwala] …...…...….......………………....…..J. [Manoj Misra] New Delhi; May 06, 2024 GKA

--- JUDGMENT 418 ---
2. One lapse on the part of the State is all it took to generate this litigation, impacting multitudes of job aspirants in the State of Madhya Pradesh. The lapse was the amendment of an existing service rule on 117.02.2020 which was recalled thereafter on 20.12.2021, restoring the rule to its original position, but in the interregnum that amended rule was applied to an ongoing recruitment process. This prompted several challenges before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur resulting in a spate of orders and directions leading up to these cases before us. 3. The Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission (MPPSC) issued an advertisement on 14.11.2019 proposing to select candidates for 571 posts in the State services in accordance with the Madhya Pradesh State Service Examination Rules, 2015 (for brevity, ‘the Rules of 2015’). The Rules of 2015 were framed in exercise of power under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India. The Madhya Pradesh State Service Examination-2019 was scheduled to be held by the MPPSC for filling up these posts, by conducting a preliminary examination followed by the main examination and interviews. The preliminary examination took place on 12.01.2020. The total number of candidates who registered for the preliminary examination stood at 3,64,877 but only 3,18,130 of them actually appeared for the examination. At that stage, on 17.02.2020, Rule 4 of the Rules of 2015 was amended by the State of Madhya Pradesh. Rule 4, as it stood prior to the amendment and to the extent relevant for the purposes of this adjudication, read as under: 2‘Rule 4. Mode of preparation of select list. (1)(a)(i) On the basis of marks obtained in Preliminary Examination, candidates numbering 15 times the vacancies as advertised category wise will be declared successful for Main examination subject to the condition that candidates have scored minimum passing marks as may be specified by the Commission. In addition to this, all the other candidates who get marks equal to “Cut Off Marks” will also be declared successful for the main examination. (ii) Firstly, a list of Candidates of unreserved category shall be prepared. This list will include the candidates selected on the basis of the common merit from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, who have not taken any advantage/relaxation given to the concerned category. (iii) Secondly, separate lists of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes will be prepared. …… (d) A common list of successful candidates shall be prepared after the preparation of all four lists, and examination result will be declared thereafter. This list will be roll number wise.’ 4. It is clear from a bare reading of the above Rule 4 that the result of the preliminary examination was to be declared by clubbing meritorious reservation category candidates, who had not availed any reservation benefit, with the meritorious unreserved category candidates and not with their respective reservation category candidates. While so, the amendment effected on 17.02.2020 brought about a sea change in this methodology. To the extent relevant, the amended Rule 4 of the Rules of 2015 read thus: 3‘4. Mode of preparation of select list: - (1)(a)(I) On the basis of marks obtained in Preliminary Examination, - category wise candidates numbering 15 times of the vacancies as advertised will be declared successful for Main examination subject to the condition that candidates have scored minimum passing marks as may be specified by the Commission. In addition to this, all the other candidates who get marks equal to “Cut Off Marks” will also be declared successful for the main examination. (II) Separate Lists of Candidates applied in Unreserved, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker Section shall be prepared. Reservation shall be given to Women and ExServicemen in all categories as per rules and instructions issued in this regard from time to time. …… (d) A common list of successful candidates shall be prepared after the preparation of all five lists, and there after examination result will be declared. This list will be roll number wise. …… (3)(d)(I) Results of Preliminary/Main Examination, the candidates shall be declared in the category mentioned as their category in their online application form. (II) Candidates of reserved category (Scheduled caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Backwards Classes/Economically Weaker Section) who get selected like general category candidates without any relaxation shall not be adjusted against the posts reserved for those reserved categories. They shall be adjusted against vacancies of unreserved category. (III) But above adjustment will only be at the time of final selection, not at the time of preliminary/main examination.’ 5. In effect, the amended Rule 4 of the Rules of 2015 provided that adjustment and segregation of meritorious reservation category candidates 4with meritorious unreserved category candidates would be only at the time of final selection and not at the time of the preliminary/main examination. 6. Surprisingly, the amended Rule 4 was applied to the ongoing recruitment process relating to the notified 571 vacant posts. The result of the preliminary examination conducted on 12.01.2020 was declared on 21.12.2020, applying the amended Rule 4. Thus, there was no segregation of meritorious reservation category candidates with those from the unreserved category and they were shown in their respective reservation categories only. The number of candidates who cleared the preliminary examination on this basis were 10,767. 7. While so, the vires of amended Rule 4(3)(d)(III) of the Rules of 2015 was challenged by some of the candidates in a batch of writ petitions before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. By interim order dated 22.01.2021 passed in those cases, the High Court directed that the recruitment process initiated pursuant to the preliminary examination result dated 21.12.2020 shall remain subject to the outcome of the writ petitions. Pursuant thereto, the MPPSC conducted the main examination of the Madhya Pradesh State Service Examination-2019 from 21.03.2021 to 26.03.2021. While so, on 20.12.2021, the Rules of 2015 were again amended by the State of Madhya Pradesh. Thereby, the position existing 5prior to the amendment effected on 17.02.2020 was restored. The newly amended Rule 4 of the Rules of 2015 read thus: 4(1)(a)(i) On the basis of marks obtained in the preliminary examination category wise candidates 20 times the number of advertised vacancies shall be declared successful for the main examination subject to the condition that the candidates have secured such minimum passing marks as may be specified by the Commission. In addition, all other candidates who have obtained marks equal to the ‘cut off marks’ shall also be declared qualified for the main examination. (ii) First of all, the cut off marks of unreserved category shall be determined. After this, those candidates belonging to the reserved category (Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker Sections) who have obtained marks more than or equal to the prescribed “cut off” of the unreserved category and who have taken the benefit of relaxations from time to time, shall be included in the respective category by separating them from the list of unreserved category. (iii) In the second phase, category-wise cut off marks of the reserved candidates shall be determined by preparing category-wise separate lists of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker Sections. ….. (c) After preparation of all the five lists, a common list of eligible candidates shall be prepared and thereafter the result shall be declared roll number wise. 8. Further, the amended Rule 4(3)(d)(III) was altogether omitted from the Rules of 2015. The result of such omission and Rule 4(1)(a)(ii), as it presently reads, is that meritorious reservation category candidates, who 6did not avail any benefit of relaxation, are to be clubbed with meritorious unreserved category candidates at the time of declaring the result of the preliminary examination itself. In effect, status quo ante was restored. 9. Notwithstanding this amendment, the result of the main examination held between 21.03.2021 and 26.03.2021 was declared by the MPPSC on 31.12.2021 and the number of candidates who provisionally qualified for interviews were 1918. However, by judgment dated 07.04.2022, a Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur partly allowed the pending writ petitions, viz., W.P. No. 542 of 2021 and batch, titled ‘Kishor Choudhary vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and another’. Challenge in this batch of cases was not only to the validity of amended Rule 4(3)(d)(III) of the Rules of 2015 but also to Section 4(4) of the Madhya Pradesh Lok Seva (Anusuchit Jatiyon, Anusuchit Jan Jatiyon aur Anya Pichhade Vargon Ke Liye Arakshan) Adhiniyam, 1994 (for brevity, ‘the Adhiniyam’). Section 4(4) of the Adhiniyam reads as follows: - ‘4(4). If a person belonging to any of the categories mentioned in sub-section (2) gets selected on the basis of merit in an open competition with general candidates, he shall not be adjusted against the vacancies reserved for such category under sub-section (2).’ The Division Bench upheld the validity of Section 4(4) of the Adhiniyam but declared Rule 4(3)(d)(III) of the Rules of 2015 ultra vires and 7set it aside. The Division Bench directed that, resultantly, the recruitment process must be conducted and completed in consonance with the unamended Rules of 2015. 10. Thereupon, the MPPSC issued Advertisement dated 29.09.2022 proposing to reconduct the main examination in compliance with the Division Bench judgment. This examination was proposed to be conducted in the second week of January, 2023. Further, on 10.10.2022, the MPPSC declared the revised result of the preliminary examination, in tune with the unamended Rule 4 of the Rules of 2015. In consequence, 13,080 candidates were declared qualified for the main examination, instead of the 10,767 candidates declared eligible earlier as per amended Rule 4(3)(d) (III). 11. While so, some candidates filed W.P. No. 23828 of 2022 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur assailing the decision of the MPPSC to cancel the result of the main examination held earlier on the ground that they would be required to reappear for the said examination despite clearing it in the first instance. The petitioners in SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023, from which this appeal arises, intervened in the said writ petition and they were also heard. This writ petition was filed on 13.10.2022. 812. At that stage, Review Petition Nos. 1112 and 1175 of 2022 were filed seeking clarification of the judgment dated 07.04.2022 in Kishor Choudhary (supra). However, by order dated 18.11.2022, the Division Bench disposed of the review petitions leaving it open to the writ Court to consider and interpret its earlier judgment dated 07.04.2022. This order was passed as the Division Bench was informed of the fact that a fresh writ petition, viz., W.P. No.

--- JUDGMENT 419 ---
23828 of 2022, was pending consideration. 13. A learned Judge of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh allowed W.P. No. 23828 of 2022 and batch, titled ‘Harshit Jain and others vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and another’ on 29.11.2022. Therein, the learned Judge noted that four categories of candidates emerged: (i) the newly qualified reservation category candidates for the main examination (2,721, in number), as per the result dated 10.10.2022; (ii) 1,918 select list candidates, who had passed the main examination held from 21.03.2021 to 26.03.2021 and qualified for the interview; (iii) candidates out of these 1,918 candidates, who would be ousted from that select list of 1,918 candidates, if the special main examination is conducted and the results are normalized; and (iv) 8,894 candidates, out of the 10,767 candidates, who had appeared for the main examination earlier but could not pass it. 914. The learned Judge observed that if the result of the main examination was cancelled, a premium would be given to the candidates from the fourth category by reviving their candidature, though they had failed to qualify in the first instance, and a right would be taken away from candidates who had already cleared the main examination and qualified for the interview. The learned Judge opined that this would cause serious prejudice and grave injustice to candidates who were declared eligible and had qualified in the short-listing process and that holding the entire main examination afresh would not only result in incurring huge costs but would also cause grave injustice to a large number of candidates, who had already cleared the main examination and were short-listed for the interview, without any fault on their part. Holding so, the learned Judge invalidated the decision taken by the MPPSC on 10.10.2022, proposing to hold a fresh main examination by cancelling the earlier one, and directed the MPPSC to hold a special main examination, as was done by it earlier on several occasions, for the new eligible reservation category candidates, as per the redrawn preliminary examination result. The learned Judge directed that, on the basis of the results of these two main examinations, a fresh list of selected candidates should be prepared in terms of the Rules of 2015 for the interview, by merging and normalizing the two lists, as per the 10process adopted by the MPPSC on previous occasions. This exercise was directed to be completed within six months.

--- JUDGMENT 420 ---
15. Aggrieved by this judgment, three of the petitioners in SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023 preferred an appeal before a Division Bench of the High Court. By judgment dated 25.01.2023 passed in Writ Appeal No. 1706 of 2022, the Division Bench dismissed the appeal, holding that the order passed by the learned Judge was just, proper and well-reasoned and did not call for any interference. 16. The judgment dated 25.01.2023 of the Division Bench was assailed before this Court in SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023, from which the present appeal arises. By order dated 10.04.2023, this Court rejected the prayer therein for interim relief but directed that, in the interest of justice, any proceedings/processes pursuant to the advertisement in question shall remain subject to the final orders to be passed in this case. 17. Prior thereto, by Advertisement dated 10.01.2023, the MPPSC notified that the main examination for the new candidates as per the revised preliminary examination result would be held from 15.04.2023 to 20.04.2023 in compliance with the judgment dated 29.11.2022 in W.P. No. 23828 of 2022. Thereafter, by order dated 13.01.2023, the MPPSC declared ineligible for interview some of the candidates who had cleared 11the main examination in the first instance. This was on the basis of the revised preliminary examination result, whereby 398 candidates out of the 1918 candidates who had cleared the earlier main examination stood ousted at the preliminary examination stage. 18. Challenging the order dated 13.01.2023, some of the affected candidates approached the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur, vide Writ Petition No. 4783 of 2023 and batch. The said batch of cases, tiled ‘Vaishali Wadhwani and others vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh and another’, was disposed of by a learned Judge of the High Court by judgment dated 23.08.2023. The learned Judge partly allowed those cases, but directed the MPPSC to merge and normalize the result of the first main examination and the result of the special main examination, held on the strength of the revised preliminary examination result, as directed in Harshit Jain (supra). Thereafter, the same learned Judge disposed of Writ Petition No. 25087 of 2023, titled ‘Priyanka Pandey vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh and another’, by judgment dated 07.10.2023, holding that his judgment in Vaishali Wadhwani (supra) was a judgment in rem and would apply to all the candidates who passed the main examination in the first instance and directed the MPPSC not to discriminate between candidates who approached the Court and those who did not. 1219. The special main examination for the reservation category candidates who were declared eligible, in terms of the revised preliminary examination result, was conducted from 15.04.2023 to 20.04.2023. Their results were declared on 18.05.2023, after normalizing and merging the results of both the main examinations. The process of normalization of the results of the two main examinations was effected by the MPPSC in consultation with and under the guidance and advice of two experts. Normalization was undertaken in the context of the marks obtained by candidates in the two main examinations by applying a formula, so as to bring them all on an even keel. Thereby, 1983 candidates stood qualified for the interview. Out of the 1983 candidates declared qualified for the interview, 1,520 candidates figured in the list of 1918 candidates declared eligible earlier, on the strength of the first main examination, and the remaining 463 candidates emerged successful either in the special main examination or in the normalization process. Totally, 398 candidates out of the 1918 candidates, who were declared eligible for the interview earlier, stood ousted and were no longer eligible. 20. The MPPSC then issued Notification dated 23.06.2023, calling upon the 1983 selected candidates to appear for the interviews. Some of the ousted 398 candidates filed writ petitions before the High Court and 13were granted interim relief, by permitting them also to appear for the interviews. Interviews were conducted from 09.08.2023 to 19.10.2023. 21. The MPPSC filed Writ Appeal No. 2017 of 2023, aggrieved by the judgment in Vaishali Wadhwani (supra), on the ground that it proceeded on the erroneous assumption that the normalization process was applied to the marks secured in the preliminary examination and not in the two main examinations held thereafter. By interim order dated 19.12.2023, a Division Bench of the High Court stayed the order dated 23.08.2023 passed in Vaishali Wadhwani (supra). Aggrieved thereby, Vaishali Wadhwani and others filed miscellaneous applications, seeking vacating of the stay granted by the Division Bench in Writ Appeal No. 2017 of 2023.

--- JUDGMENT 421 ---
22. We are informed that the State of Madhya Pradesh proceeded on the strength of the results declared after the normalization and also issued appointment orders to the selected candidates, thereby enabling them to join service. Insofar as the seven petitioners in SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023 are concerned, the MPPSC stated that only three of them had cleared the preliminary examination, as per the pre-revised result dated 21.12.2020, and were eligible to write the main examination. However, one of them did not appear for the main examination while the other two did and 14failed. Thereafter, all seven of them were declared eligible, in terms of the revised preliminary examination result dated 10.10.2022, but they failed the special main examination and in the process of normalization held thereafter, as per the results declared on 18.05.2023. 23. Be it noted that Vaishali Wadhwani and others, the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 4783 of 2023 and batch, were successful before the High Court to some extent inasmuch as their writ petitions were partly allowed by the judgment dated 23.08.2023, but directing the MPPSC to merge and normalize the two lists, i.e., the result of the first main examination and the result of the special main examination. They, however, chose to file SLP (C) No. 23514 of 2023 before this Court against the said judgment dated 23.08.2023. As already noted hereinabove, Writ Appeal No. 2017 of 2023 was filed against the very same judgment by the MPPSC before a Division Bench of the High Court and the said appeal is pending consideration. More importantly, the petitions filed therein by Vaishali Wadhwani and others, seeking the vacating of the stay of the judgment dated 23.08.2023, were dismissed and that order was not subjected to challenge by them. Having sought vacating of the stay order passed in relation to the judgment dated 23.08.2023, in effect, seeking implementation thereof, it is surprising that Vaishali Wadhwani and the others sought to challenge the very same 15judgment before this Court. In any event, even if they have any grievance with the said judgment, it is not open to them to bypass the remedy of appeal available to them before the High Court itself. We are, therefore, not inclined to entertain their special leave petition. 24. Similarly, Mamta Mishra, who was also a petitioner in Writ Petition No. 4783 of 2023 along with Vaishali Wadhwani, chose to file SLP (C) No. 27620 of 2023 assailing the judgment dated 23.08.2023 passed therein. For reasons alike, as stated in the context of SLP (C) No. 23514 of 2023 filed by Vaishali Wadhwani and others, this special leave petition also does not merit consideration. 25.

--- JUDGMENT 422 ---
No. 228055 was filed by 182 candidates seeking to come on record in SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023, so as to support the petitioners therein. They stated that they stood ousted after normalization and merger of the marks secured by candidates in the two main examinations. However, as grievances of candidates who appeared in the Madhya Pradesh State Service Examination-2019 are not personal or 16individual to them alone and we are concerned with resolving the larger issue, we do not consider it necessary to implead any of these individual candidates who were not parties before the High Court or give them a hearing. In any event, all the relevant issues and aspects have been comprehensively and conclusively addressed by the learned senior counsel/counsel appearing for the parties on record and nothing more remains to be added thereto. 26. Further, we had requested the two experts, who had guided the MPPSC in undertaking the process of normalization, to appear before us so as to explain the methodology adopted. Having heard the two experts, namely Dr. Vastashpati Shastri and Mr. Indresh Mangal, we are fully satisfied that a transparent process, which was completely above board, was adopted to bring all the candidates onto an even platform so as to finalize the list of candidates eligible to be interviewed. This was done by applying a formula uniformly to the marks secured by all the candidates who appeared in the two main examinations, so that their marks would become comparable and enable preparation of a unified marks list. 27.

--- JUDGMENT 423 ---
and others vs. Atul Kumar Dwivedi and others1, this Court had occasion to consider application of moderation/scaling of marks in a recruitment process and as to when such 1 (2022) 11 SCC 578 17an exercise would be permissible. It was observed that normalization of marks means increasing and/or decreasing the marks obtained by students in different timing sessions (shifts) to a certain number, as observed by the High Court in its judgment, and it was noted that such normalization techniques help in comparing corresponding normalized values from two or more different data sets in a way that it eliminates the effects of the variation in the scale of the data sets, i.e., a data set with large values can be easily compared with a data set of smaller values and the normalized score/percentile is obtained by applying a formula. This Court, accordingly, concluded that the exercise undertaken in adopting the process of normalization was quite consistent with the requirements of law. This Court further observed that decisions made by expert bodies, including the Public Service Commissions, should not be lightly interfered with, unless instances of arbitrary and malafide exercise of power are made out. 28. On similar lines, in Tajvir Singh Sodhi and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others2, this Court observed that interference in the selection process for public employment should generally be avoided, recognizing the importance of maintaining the autonomy and integrity of the selection process. Noting that Courts would recognize that the process of selection involves a high degree of expertise and discretion and that it 2 2023 SCC OnLine SC 344 18would not be appropriate for Courts to substitute their judgment for that of a selection committee, it was observed that it is not within the domain of the Court, exercising the power of judicial review, to enter into the merits of a selection process, a task which is the prerogative of and is within the expert domain of a selection committee, subject of course to a caveat that if there are proven allegations of malfeasance or violations of statutory rules, only in such cases of inherent arbitrariness, can the Courts intervene. 29. The detailed explanation by the experts being rather technical, we do not propose to burden this judgment with the same, but the learned senior counsel/counsel opposing the MPPSC, who also heard the experts, did not bring to our notice any lacuna in the process adopted or the formula applied, whereby injustice was done to any candidate or any arbitrariness crept in. We, therefore, hold that the process of normalization and the consequential merger of the marks secured by the candidates who appeared in the two main examinations cannot be found fault with. 30. We may also note that Rule 4(3)(d)(III) of the Rules of 2015 patently harmed the interests of the reservation category candidates, as even meritorious candidates from such categories, who had not availed any reservation benefit/relaxation, were to be treated as belonging to those reservation categories and they were not to be segregated with meritorious 19unreserved category candidates at the preliminary examination result stage. As a result, they continued to occupy the reservation category slots which would have otherwise gone to deserving reservation category candidates lower down in the merit list of that category, had they been included with meritorious unreserved category candidates on the strength of their marks. 31.

--- JUDGMENT 424 ---
In Saurav Yadav and others v. State of U.P. and others3, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court affirmed the principle that candidates belonging to any of the vertical reservation categories would be entitled to be selected in the ‘open category’ and if such candidates belonging to reservation categories are entitled to be selected on the basis of their own merit, their selection cannot be counted against the quota reserved for the categories of vertical reservation that they belong to. It was further observed that reservations, both vertical and horizontal, are methods of ensuring representation in public services and these are not to be seen as rigid ‘slots’, where a candidate’s merit, which otherwise entitles him to be shown in the open general category, is foreclosed. The Bench further observed that the ‘open category’ is open to all and the only condition for a candidate to be shown in it is merit, regardless of whether reservation benefit of either type was available to him or her. 3 (2021) 4 SCC 542 2032. This being the settled legal position, it appears that the State of Madhya Pradesh itself realized the harm that it was doing to the reservation category candidates and chose to restore Rule 4, as it stood earlier, which enabled drawing up the result of the preliminary examination by segregating deserving meritorious reservation category candidates with meritorious unreserved category candidates at the preliminary examination stage itself. As this was the process that was undertaken after the judgment in Kishor Choudhary (supra), whereby a greater number of reservation category candidates cleared the preliminary examination and were held eligible to appear in the main examination, there can be no dispute with the legality and validity of such process. 33. We may also note that the judgment in Kishor Choudhary (supra) was not subjected to challenge before this Court after the dismissal of the review petitions. The direction therein was to conduct and complete the examination process in accordance with the unamended Rules of the 2015. It was the later judgment in Harshit Jain (supra) that advocated the methodology of holding a special main examination for the reservation category candidates who were found eligible after revising the preliminary examination result in keeping with the unamended Rules of 2015. This direction was found to be justified by the Division Bench, which dismissed 21the writ appeal by way of the impugned judgment and, in our considered opinion, rightly so. 34. On the above analysis, we find that the impugned judgment dated 25.01.2023 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Writ Appeal No. 1706 of 2022 does not brook interference on any ground, be it on facts or in law. The civil appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 5817 of 2023 is, therefore, bereft of merit and is accordingly dismissed. Further, as already mentioned hereinbefore, we are not inclined to entertain and consider SLP (C) Nos. 23514 and 27620 of 2023 on merits. The two SLPs are dismissed. Pending I.A.s shall also stand dismissed. Parties shall bear their respective costs. ………………………..,J (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) ………………………..,J (SANJAY KUMAR) May 1, 2024; New Delhi. 22

--- JUDGMENT 425 ---
2. The appellants in this appeal seek to assail the order dated 20th February, 2024 passed by the learned Division Bench of the High Court of Calcutta in MAT No.2124 of 2023. By the said order, the learned Division Bench rejected the appeal preferred by the appellants and affirmed the order dated 5th October, 2023 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta in Contempt Petition No.694 of 2022 in WPA No. 24206 of 2019, wherein the following directions were issued:- “Mr. Krishnendu Narayan Choudhury, Chairman, English Bazar Municipality is personally present in Court. 1Time has been sought for by the learned senior advocate representing the alleged contemnor to comply the direction passed by the Court. On such request the matter stands adjourned till 30th November 2023. The order of the Court shall be complied and fresh affidavit of compliance be filed on the adjourned date. On the assurance given by the learned senior advocate representing the alleged contemnor, the personal appearance of the alleged contemnor stands dispensed with for the time being.” 3. The appellants have raised a grievance that the directions issued by the learned Single Judge in the contempt petition have a direct bearing on their residential premises. It is contended that the private respondent(respondent No.1 herein), filed the writ petition before the learned Single Judge alleging that while raising the construction of the residential property, the appellants did not maintain the open spaces prescribed under Rule 50 of the West Bengal Municipal(Building) Rules, 2007(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules of 2007’) . 4. Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants, urged that the learned Single Judge was not justified in entertaining the writ petition which raised a purely private dispute between two neighbours. He further submitted that acting under the pressure of the contempt proceedings, the 2municipal authorities have issued a show cause notice to the appellants with the observation that the building raised by the appellants herein is in contravention of Rule 50 of the Rules of 2007. His contention is that there being no allegation that the building was constructed in violation of the sanctioned building plan, the notice by itself is without jurisdiction. He also urged that under the pressure of contempt proceedings, the municipal authorities are bent upon passing an adverse order for demolishing the construction raised by the appellants herein on their plot, which was in strict compliance of the sanctioned building plan. He, thus, urged that the appellants herein may be given liberty to challenge the enquiry report dated 16th October, 2023 and the show cause notice dated 24th April, 2024 by taking recourse to the provisions contained in West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993. 5. However, his submission is that the municipal authorities are likely to be prejudiced by the contempt proceedings as they are acting under the pressure thereof and thus, the appellants will not get a fair chance to contest the notice. 6. Learned counsel appearing for respondent No.1 vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the 3appellants. He urged that the learned Single Judge, after extensive consideration of the material available on record has found that the sanctioned building plan was violated by the appellants while raising construction of their residential premises and as such, the direction to conduct an enquiry into the matter was justified. 7. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the materials placed on record. 8. We express our reservations on the exercise of writ jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta in a controversy, which appears to be a purely private dispute between the appellants herein and the private respondent(respondent No.1 herein), being immediate neighbours. 9. Prima facie, we are of the view that if at all the private respondent(respondent No.1 herein) was aggrieved of irregularity committed, if any, in the construction raised by the appellants on their own plot, the appropriate remedy for him would have been to approach the municipal authorities and if no proper response was forthcoming, then the civil Court was the appropriate forum for ventilating the grievances of the nature which have been raised before the writ Court. 410. Be that as it may, the fact remains that now the enquiry report has been presented before the High Court of Calcutta by the municipal authorities. As per the enquiry report dated 16th October 2023, the construction made by the appellants has not been found to be in violation of the building plan and rather, it has been mentioned that the sanction plan to construct the building was granted in violation of Rule 50 of the Rules of 2007. 11. Indisputably, the appellants have a right to challenge the said enquiry report and the show cause notice. Hence, we leave the appellants at liberty to challenge the show cause notice dated 24th April, 2024 and the enquiry report(s) by resorting to the provisions contained in the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993. 12. Needless to say that the objections so raised by the appellants will be considered and decided objectively without being prejudiced by either the pending contempt proceedings or the orders passed in the writ proceedings. It may be noted that as per sub-clause(3) of Section 218 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, in case the objections raised by the appellants do not find favour of the Board of Councillors, they would have a right to file an appeal in the Court having jurisdiction. 13.

--- JUDGMENT 426 ---
1 REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 429 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION REVIEW PETITION (C) No. 1025 of 2019 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6567 OF 2014 LEHNA SINGH (D) BY LRS. …. PETITIONER VERSUS GURNAM SINGH (D) BY LRS. & ORS. ...RESPONDENTS J U D G M E N T PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. The petitioner has preferred this Review Petition seeking review of the Order dated 13.03.2019 passed in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 wherein the present petitioner was the respondent. In the Order under review, the Civil Appeal was allowed, and the judgment and decree passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana on 27.11.2007 in Civil Regular2 Second Appeal No. 2191 of 1985 was set aside and the judgment and decree passed by the District Judge, Sangrur, on 06.06.1985 in Civil Appeal No. 27 of 1983 has been restored. 2. In the judgment under review, this Court held that the judgment and decree passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court is beyond the scope and ambit of Section 100 of Code of Civil Procedure, 19081 on the ground that in exercise of such power, the High Court could not have reappreciated the entire evidence on record to unsettle the finding of facts recorded by the First Appellate Court, by substituting its own opinion for that of the First Appellate Court. 3. Basing the judgment rendered in Pankajakshi (Dead) Through Legal Representatives & Ors. v. Chandrika & Ors.2, this Court directed that the review petition be listed before the open Court for hearing and subsequently on 13.08.2019 notices were issued to the opposite parties, at the same time, directing the parties to maintain status quo. 1.

--- JUDGMENT 427 ---
Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner would also refer to the subsequent judgments of this Court in Randhir Kaur v. Prithvi Pal Singh & Ors.5 and Gurbachan Sing (Dead) Through Lrs. v. Gurcharan Singh (Dead) Through Lrs. & Ors.6 wherein this Court relying upon Pankajakshi (supra) held that the scope of interference within 3. ‘Punjab Act’ 4. (2001) 4 SCC 262 5. (2019) 17 SCC 71 6. (2023) SCC Online SC 8754 the jurisdiction of the Punjab and Haryana High Court would be the same as under Section 100 of CPC as it existed prior to the 1976 amendment. The provisions of Section 41 of the Punjab Act and of Section 100 CPC, before its amendment in 1976, are in pari materia. Therefore, the questions of law are not required to be framed in second appeal before Punjab and Haryana High Court whose jurisdiction in second appeal is circumscribed by provision of Section 41 of the Punjab Act. 6. Shri Patwalia would submit that this Court has set aside the Judgment of High Court terming it as beyond the power under Section 100 CPC which is not legally correct, in view of the law laid down in Pankajakshi (supra). It is further argued that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner was entitled to succeed to the property by way of natural succession and the finding of the High Court that the Will relied upon by the respondents has not been proved as it is surrounded by suspicious circumstances ought not to have been interfered by this Court. It is argued that a finding of fact erroneously or perversely recorded by the First Appellate Court can always be interfered by the High Court. Hence, there is no5 infirmity in the Judgment rendered by the High Court and the same ought not to have been interfered by this Court while deciding the Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 on an erroneous ground that the High Court has travelled beyond its jurisdiction and power under Section 100 CPC as it stands of the 1976 amendment. 7. Shri Manoj Swarup, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents would not dispute the legal position as has been settled by this Court in the matter of Pankajakshi (supra). However, he would submit that even in the case when the High Court would exercise the power under Section 41 of the Punjab Act, the finding of fact recorded by the First Appellate Court cannot be interfered on re-appreciation of evidence to substitute its own decision for that of the First Appellate Court. According to him, the finding recorded by the First Appellate Court was borne out from the record. Therefore, the High Court erred in interfering with the said finding, and this Court rightly set aside the Judgment and decree of the High Court while deciding the Civil Appeal. According to Shri Swarup, the respondents had proved the Will, which was a6 registered one, in accordance with law and that there were no suspicious circumstances accompanying the Will. 8. When this Court rendered the judgment under review in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014, the only ground which weighed with the Court was that the High Court exercised the power under Section 100 CPC erroneously and decided the second appeal by re-appreciating the evidence without even framing a substantial question of law. 9. The second appeal in Punjab and Haryana High Court is heard under Section 41 of the Punjab Act, which is reproduced hereunder for ready reference: - “41. Second Appeals – (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by any court subordinate to the High Court on any of the following grounds, namely: (a) the decision being contrary to law or to some custom or usage having the force of law: (b) the decision having failed to determine some material issue of law or custom or usage having the force of law: (c) a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided by the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (V of 1908), or by any other law for the time being in force which may possibly have produced error or defect in the decision of the case upon the merits; [Explanation – A question relating to the existence or validity of a custom or usage shall be deemed to be a question of law within the meaning of this section:] (2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte.”7 10. The provision contained in Section 41 of the Punjab Act, as reproduced above, does not mandate framing of a substantial question of law for entertaining the second appeal. Therefore, a second appeal under Section 41 of Punjab Act can be entertained by the Punjab and Haryana High Court even without framing a substantial question of law. 11. It would be appropriate to refer to the provision contained in Section 41 of the Punjab Act in juxtaposition to Section 100 CPC, before its amendment in 1976, to appreciate and understand the jurisdiction of Punjab and Haryana High Court in second appeal. The provisions are reproduced hereunder for ready reference: - “Section 41 of the Punjab Act Section 100 CPC 41. Second appeals.—(1) An appeal 100. Second appeal.—(1) Save shall lie to the High Court from where otherwise expressly every decree passed in appeal by provided in the body of this Code any court subordinate to the High or by any other law for the time Court on any of the following being in force, an appeal shall lie grounds, namely: to the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by any court subordinate to a High Court, on any of the following grounds, namely: (a) the decision being contrary to (a) the decision being contrary to law or to some custom or usage law or to some usage having the having the force of law; force of law; (b) the decision having failed to (b) the decision having failed to determine some material issue of determine some material issue of law or custom or usage having the law or usage having the force of force of law; l aw; (c) a substantial error or defect in (c) a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided by the Code the procedure provided by this8 of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of Code or by any other law for the 1908), or by any other law for the time being in force, which may time being in force which may possibly have produced error or possibly have produced error or defect in the decision of the case defect in the decision of the case upon the merits. upon the merits; * * * (2) An appeal may lie under this (2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree section from an appellate decree passed ex parte. passed ex parte.” 12. In Pankajakshi (supra), the Constitution Bench of this Court has held that substantial question of law may not be required to be framed in a second appeal before Punjab and Haryana High Court. However, the finding of fact recorded, cannot be interfered with even in terms of Section 41 of Punjab Act. The law laid down by this Court in Pankajakshi (supra) has been relied upon in Randhir Kaur (supra) to hold thus in paragraphs 10 to 12: - “10. The effect of the Constitution Bench judgment in Pankajakshi is that in second appeal, the scope of interference within the Punjab and Haryana High Court would be the same as the Code of Civil Procedure existed prior to the 1976 Amendment. The provisions of Section 41 of the Punjab Act and of Section 100 CPC are in pari materia. 11. Some of the judgments of this Court dealing with the scope of the old Section 100 are required to be discussed. In a judgment in Deity Pattabhiramaswamy v. S. Hanymayya [AIR 1959 SC 57] — three Judges, while examining the scope of Section 100 CPC, held as under : (AIR p. 59, para 13) “13. The finding on the title was arrived at by the learned District Judge not on the basis of any document of title but on a consideration of relevant documentary and oral evidence adduced by the parties. The learned Judge, therefore, in our9 opinion, clearly exceeded his jurisdiction in setting aside the said finding. The provisions of Section 100 are clear and unambiguous. As early as in 1891, the Judicial Committee in Durga Choudhrain v. Jawahir Singh Choudhri [1890 SCC OnLine PC 10 : (1889-90) 17 IA 122] stated thus : (SCC OnLine PC) ‘There is no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on the ground of an erroneous finding of fact, however gross or inexcusable the error may seem to be.’ The principle laid down in this decision has been followed in innumerable cases by the Privy Council as well as by different High Courts in this country. Again the Judicial Committee in Midnapur Zamindary Co.

--- JUDGMENT 428 ---
v. Uma Charan Mandal [1923 SCC OnLine PC 31 : (1924-25) 29 CWN 131] further elucidated the principle by pointing out : (SCC OnLine PC) ‘[If] the question to be decided is one of fact, it does not involve an issue of law merely because documents which were not instruments of title or contracts or statutes or otherwise the direct foundations of rights but were merely historical documents, have to be construed.’ Nor does the fact that the finding of the first appellate court is based upon some documentary evidence make it any the less a finding of fact (see Wali Mohammad v. Mohd. Bakhsh [1929 SCC OnLine PC 115 : (1929-30) 57 IA 86 : ILR (1930) 11 Lah 199]). But, notwithstanding such clear and authoritative pronouncements on the scope of the provisions of Section 100 CPC, some learned Judges of the High Courts are disposing of second appeals as if they were first appeals. This introduces, apart from the fact that the High Court assumes and exercises a jurisdiction which it does not possess, a gambling element in the litigation and confusion in the mind of the litigant public. This case affords a typical illustration of such interference by a Judge of the High Court in excess of his jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC. We have, therefore, no alternative but to set aside the decree of the High Court on the simple ground that the learned Judge of the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere in second appeal with the findings of fact given by the first appellate court based upon an appreciation of the relevant evidence. In the result, the decree of the High Court is set aside and the appeal is allowed with costs throughout.” 12. Later, in a judgment, in Kshitish Chandra Bose v. Commr. [(1981) 2 SCC 103] — three Judges, of this Court held that the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on findings of fact even if it was erroneous. The Court held as follows : (SCC p. 108, para 11) “11. On a perusal of the first judgment of the High Court we are satisfied that the High Court clearly exceeded its jurisdiction under Section 100 in reversing pure concurrent findings of fact given by the trial court and the then appellate10 court both on the question of title and that of adverse possession. In Kharbuja Kuer v. Jangbahadur Rai [AIR 1963 SC 1203 : (1963) 1 SCR 456] this Court held that the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on findings of fact even if it was erroneous. In this connection, this Court observed as follows : (AIR pp. 1205-06, paras 5 & 7) ‘5. It is settled law that the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on the ground of erroneous finding of fact. … *** 7. … As the two courts approached the evidence from a correct perspective and gave a concurrent finding of fact, the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the said finding.’ To the same effect is another decision of this Court in V. Ramachandra Ayyar v. Ramalingam Chettiar [AIR 1963 SC 302 : (1963) 3 SCR 604] where the Court observed as follows : (AIR p. 306, para 12) ‘12. … But the High Court cannot interfere with the conclusions of fact recorded by the lower appellate court, however erroneous the said conclusions may appear to be to the High Court, because, as the Privy Council has observed, however gross or inexcusable the error may seem to be, there is no jurisdiction under Section 100 to correct that error.’ ” 13. In a recent decision in the matter of Gurbachan Singh (supra), this court has reiterated the legal position vis-à-vis Section 41 of Punjab Act and the unamended Section 100 CPC holding thus in paragraphs 9 to 11: - “9. The Constitution bench in Pankajakshi (Dead) through LRs v. Chandrika had held Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann which held section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 to be repugnant to section 100, CPC to be bad in law, thereby implying that section 41 of the Punjab Court Act holds as good law. It was held as under: — “25. We are afraid that this judgment in Kulwant Kaur case [Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann, (2001) 4 SCC 262] does not state the law correctly on both propositions. First and foremost, when Section 97(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 speaks of any amendment made or any provision inserted in the principal Act by virtue of a State Legislature or a High Court, the said section refers only to amendments made and/or provisions inserted in the Code of Civil Procedure itself and not elsewhere. This is clear from the11 expression “principal Act” occurring in Section 97(1). What Section 97(1) really does is to state that where a State Legislature makes an amendment in the Code of Civil Procedure, which amendment will apply only within the four corners of the State, being made under Schedule VII List III Entry 13 to the Constitution of India, such amendment shall stand repealed if it is inconsistent with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Parliamentary enactment contained in the 1976 Amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure. This is further made clear by the reference in Section 97(1) to a High Court. The expression “any provision inserted in the principal Act” by a High Court has reference to Section 122 of the Code of Civil Procedure by which High Courts may make rules regulating their own procedure, and the procedure of civil courts subject to their superintendence, and may by such rules annul, alter, or add to any of the rules contained in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure.” 10. Recently, a Bench of three learned Judges in Satyender v.

--- JUDGMENT 429 ---
Saroj while dealing with a property dispute arising out of the State of Haryana, held as under:— “16. We may also add here that we are presently concerned with the laws in the State of Haryana. All the same, the laws as applicable in Punjab in the year 1918, were also applicable to the present territory of Haryana since it was then a part of the State of Punjab. Later on, the creation of the new State of Haryana, under the provision given in Section 88 of the Punjab Re-organization Act, 1966, the laws applicable in the erstwhile State of Punjab continued to be applicable in the new State of Haryana. Furthermore, State of Haryana formally adopted the laws of the erstwhile State of Punjab, under Section 89 of the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966. Therefore, in the State of Haryana a court in second appeal is not required to formulate a substantial question of law, as what is applicable in Haryana is Section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 and not Section 100 of CPC. Consequently, it was not necessary for the High Court to formulate a substantial question of law.” 11. In view of the above discussion, it is clear to this court that the judgment of the learned single Judge sitting in second appellate jurisdiction cannot be faulted for not having framed substantial questions of law under section 100, CPC”. 14. Regard being had to the settled legal position in Pankajakshi (supra) reiterated in Randhir Kaur (supra) and Gurbachan Singh (supra), we are of the view that the12 Judgment of this Court under review in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 has been wrongly decided holding that the Punjab and Haryana High Court has travelled beyond the jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC by interfering with the finding of fact recorded by the First Appellate Court without framing a substantial question of law. 15. Since there is an error apparent on the face of the record, in view of the law laid down in Pankajakshi (supra), we review our judgment in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 and recall the same for deciding the Civil Appeal on merits. The Review Petition is allowed. The Civil Appeal is restored to its original number and taken on board with the consent of the parties, and we proceed to decide the Civil Appeal afresh on merits. Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 16. This Civil Appeal is preferred by the defendants in the suit against whom the plaintiff brought a suit for perpetual injunction on the pleadings, inter alia, that he and his brother Bhagwan Singh alias Nikka Singh were owners in possession of the suit land. Bhagwan Singh was issueless being unmarried.13 Since the defendant No. 1 was trying to dispossess the plaintiff forcibly, the suit for perpetual injunction was filed. The defendants did not deny that plaintiff and Bhagwan Singh were real brothers. However, he claimed to be the half-brother of Bhagwan Singh as they were given birth by same lady namely Mrs. Har Kaur who was earlier married to Sunder Singh but after his death, she was married to Mehar Singh and the defendant no. 1 was born out of the wedlock of Har Kaur with Mehar Singh. The defendant’s case rested on a Will allegedly executed by Bhagwan Singh on 17.01.1980. Prior to this, Bhagwan Singh had executed an unregistered Will on 17.08.1979. However, the defendant admitted that during the lifetime of Bhagwan Singh, the suit land was cultivated jointly by the plaintiff and Bhagwan Singh. In the alternative, the defendant pleaded that if plaintiff’s possession over the suit land is proved, the defendant nos. 2 to 6, the beneficiary of the Will, are entitled to joint possession of half share of the suit land. 17. On the strength of evidence adduced by the parties in course of trial, it was held by the trial court that the defendants14 have failed to prove the genuineness of the Will, therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to succeed by way of natural succession. It was found that the Will relied by the defendants is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, therefore, it is not a validly executed Will. The trial court held that the defendants’ case that they served the deceased Bhagwan Singh during the lifetime and out of love and affection for the services rendered, he executed the Will in their favour as they were also related to the deceased, has not been believed by the trial court. There is evidence that it was plaintiff who admitted Nikka Singh in hospital on 02.08.1979 when he was ill and his address was also shown as care of Lehna Singh (the ‘plaintiff’). 18. Upon careful marshalling of evidence, the trial court recorded a finding about active participation of Jagjit Singh (DW-3) in execution of the Will and the absence of mention in the Will as to why he disinherited his real brother, the plaintiff, from succeeding the property and more so when he was living with him and was attended to during his ill health. Since the defendant admit joint possession and cultivation of the land by Nikka Singh and plaintiff, a fact contrary to this mentioned in15 the Will was also highlighted by the trial court. Despite there being an earlier Will there was no mention that the said Will is cancelled and the name of father of Gurnam Singh was also wrongly mentioned. The trial court also found that Nikka Singh was suffering from cancer and was also a patient of T.B. 19. The trial court also found that the plaintiff is in possession of the suit land as the said fact has been admitted by one of the defendant’s witnesses namely Gurnam Singh. 20. The First Appellate Court set aside the finding of the trial court holding that the trial court was wrongly persuaded by insignificant circumstances to hold that the Will in favour of the defendant nos. 2 to 6 is not genuine and that it is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. The First Appellate Court eventually passed a decree for joint possession in favour of defendant which was assailed by plaintiff Lehna Singh before the High Court by preferring an appeal under Section 41 of the Punjab Act. The High Court, under the impugned Judgment, allowed the appeal, set aside the appellate decree passed by the District Judge, Sangrur, restoring the Judgment and decree passed by the trial court.16 21. The High Court has discussed the evidence threadbare and framed the following substantial questions of law: - (i) Whether the Appellate Court can reverse the findings recorded by the learned trial court without adverting to the specific finding of the trial court? (ii) Whether the judgment passed by the learned lower Appellate Court is perverse and outcome of misreading of evidence? 22. The High Court answered both the questions of law in favour of the plaintiff/respondent herein (in Civil Appeal) on the reasoning that when the person entitled to the property of the deceased by way of natural succession, is disinherited from the property without giving any reason and the covenants in the Will are also found to be factually incorrect, mere registration of the Will and proof of the same by attesting witnesses could not be treated to be sufficient to over-come the suspicious circumstances as has been done by the First Appellate Court. The High Court also observed that the propounders of the Will were earlier tried for murder of the deceased-testator and there being no evidence on record to show that the deceased had special love and affection with the defendants and when it is proved that the plaintiff is in possession of the land and the defendant and their witnesses actively participated in the17 execution of the Will, there is glaring suspicious circumstances to hold that the Will is not genuine. It was also observed that the testator was residing with the plaintiff, and it was he who got him admitted in the hospital, it was proved that the plaintiff was taking care of the deceased at the time of his need. Merely because the attesting witnesses had no enmity towards the plaintiff, it cannot dispel the suspicious circumstances surrounded around the Will. 23. It is settled law that the First Appellate Court, while setting aside the Judgment and decree of the trial court, is required to meet the reasoning given by the trial court in rejecting the Will, which in the present case has not been done by the First Appellate Court. 24. The requirement of exercise of jurisdiction by the First Appellate Court under Section 96 of CPC has been dealt with by this Court in Chintamani Ammal vs. Nandagopal Gounder and Anr.7, wherein after noticing the previous judgments of this Court, the following has been held in paragraphs 18, 19 and 20 thus: - 7. (2007) 4 SCC 16318 “18. Furthermore, when the learned trial Judge arrived at a finding on the basis of appreciation of oral evidence, the first appellate court could have reversed the same only on assigning sufficient reasons therefor. Save and except the said statement of DW 2, the learned Judge did not consider any other materials brought on record by the parties.

--- JUDGMENT 430 ---
In Rajbir Kaur v. S. Chokesiri and Co., this Court observed: (SCC pp. 39-41, paras 48-52) “48. Reference on the point could also usefully be made to A.L. Goodhart's article in which, the learned author points out: ‘A judge sitting without a jury must perform dual function. The first function consists in the establishment of the particular facts. This may be described as the perceptive function. It is what you actually perceive by the five senses. It is a datum of experience as distinct from a conclusion. It is obvious that, in almost all cases tried by a judge without a jury, an appellate court, which has not had an opportunity of seeing the witnesses, must accept his conclusions of fact because it cannot tell on what grounds he reached them and what impression the various witnesses made on him.’ 49. The following is the statement of the same principle in ‘The Supreme Court Practice’: ‘Great weight is due to the decision of a judge of first instance whenever, in a conflict of testimony, the demeanour and manner of witnesses who have been seen and heard by him are material elements in the consideration of the truthfulness of these statements. But the parties to the cause are nevertheless entitled as well on questions of fact as on questions of law to demand the decision of the court of appeal, and that court cannot excuse itself from the task of weighing conflicting evidence, and drawing its19 own conclusions, though it should always bear in mind that it has neither seen nor heard the witnesses and should make due allowance in this respect. (pp. 854-55) …Not to have seen witnesses puts Appellate Judges in a permanent position of disadvantage against the trial Judge, and unless it can be shown that he has failed to use or has palpably misused his advantage—for example has failed to observe inconsistencies or indisputable fact or material probabilities (ibid. and Yuill v.

--- JUDGMENT 431 ---
855) 50. A consideration of this aspect would be incomplete without a reference to the observations of B.K. Mukherjea, J., in Sarju Pershad Ramdeo Sahu v. Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh [1950 SCC 714 : AIR 1951 SC 120 : 1950 SCR 781] which as a succinct statement of the rule, cannot indeed be bettered: ‘The question for our consideration is undoubtedly one of fact, the decision of which depends upon the appreciation of the oral evidence adduced in the case. In such cases, the appellate court has got to bear in mind that it has not the advantage which the trial Judge had in having the witnesses before him and of observing the manner in which they deposed in court. This certainly does not mean that when an appeal lies on facts, the appellate court is not competent to reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the trial Judge. The rule is— and it is nothing more than a rule of practice—that when there is conflict of oral evidence of the parties on any matter in issue and the decision hinges upon the credibility of the witnesses, then unless there is some special feature about the evidence of a particular witness which has escaped the trial Judge's notice or there is a sufficient balance of improbability to displace his opinion as to where the credibility lies, the appellate court should not interfere with the finding of the trial Judge on a question of fact.20 51. The area in which the question lies in the present case is the area of the perceptive functions of the trial Judge where the possibility of errors of inference does not play a significant role. The question whether the statement of the witnesses in regard to what was amenable to perception by sensual experience as to what they saw and heard is acceptable or not is the area in which the well-known limitation on the powers of the appellate court to reappreciate the evidence falls. The appellate court, if it seeks to reverse those findings of fact, must give cogent reasons to demonstrate how the trial court fell into an obvious error. 52. With respect to the High Court, we think, that, what the High Court did was what perhaps even an appellate court, with full- fledged appellate jurisdiction would, in the circumstances of the present case, have felt compelled to abstain from and reluctant to do. Contention (c) would also require to be upheld.” (emphasis in original) 25. In Jagannath v. Arulappa & Anr.8 and H.K.N.

--- JUDGMENT 432 ---
Swami v. Irshad Basith (Dead) By Lrs.9, this Court has opined that it would be wholly improper to allow first appeal without adverting to the specific findings of the trial court and that the First Appellate Court is required to address all the issues and determine the appeal upon assignment of cogent reasons. 26. Having considered the evidence on record and the findings of the trial court, the First Appellate Court and the High Court, we are satisfied that the First Appellate Court wrongly set aside the Judgment, decree, and findings of the trial court without meeting the findings of the trial court which could not have 8. (2005) 12 SCC 303 9. (2005) 10 SCC 24321 been done in exercise of power under Section 96 CPC. Therefore, the High Court has rightly set aside the Judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court to restore the Judgment and decree of the trial court. On independent examination also, we have found that the findings recorded by trial court are borne out from the evidence on record and are neither perverse nor illegal. 27. Therefore, we find no substance in this appeal which deserves to be and is hereby dismissed. 28. The parties shall bear their own costs. ……………………………………..

--- JUDGMENT 433 ---
2024 INSC 402 Non-reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO.9355 OF 2011 STATE OF ORISSA ....APPELLANT VERSUS SANTI KUMAR MITRA & ANOTHER ....RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T ARAVIND KUMAR, J. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 1. The appellant/State of Orissa has filed this appeal assailing the order of the High Court of Orissa dated 13/11/2009 passed in Second Appeal No.98/1993 whereunder second appeal filed by the appellant herein came to be dismissed and consequently the judgement and decree passed in favour of the 1respondents by the First Appellate Court in TA No.2/100 of 1992-1991 came to be affirmed. 2. The suit property, being a Khasmahal, measuring 594 decimals situated in Plot bearing No.894, Khata No.158, Balukhand Puri was originally leased in favour of one Shailendra Nath Mitra (hereinafter referred to as ''original lessee'') for 30 years commencing from 29/09/1905 and said lease was due to expire on 29/09/1935. On 16/10/1935, the original lessee applied for renewal of the lease which came to be referred as Lease Renewal Case No.40/1935-36. 3. Above being the situation, the original lessee expired on 04/06/1941 leaving behind his two sons Nalininath Mitra, Jatindranath Mitra (Father of the Plaintiffs), his wife Khagendrabala Mitra and his daughter-in-law Smt. Gauribala Mitra as his legal heirs. A substitution petition came to be filed by the legal heirs of original lessee in Case No.40/1935-36 and subsequently on 22/01/1944 the lease came to be renewed and a fresh lease deed came to be executed in favour of the legal heirs of the original lessee, for a further period of 30 years with effect from date of expiry viz., 26/09/1935. The aforesaid lease agreement executed in favour of the legal heirs of the original lessee expired on 25/09/1965. 24. On 23/12/1972, Late Nalininath Mitra (one of the lessee) preferred an application for renewal of the lease in Lease Renewal Case No.11/1972. The Revenue Officer, Puri, Orissa directed the case records to be forwarded to Tahsildar, Puri for enquiry and report. Pursuant to the order of the Revenue Officer, the Tahsildar after conducting field verification, submitted a report on 30/05/1975 to the Collector, Puri indicating that the structures over the suit property are dilapidated and that outsiders have occupied the house and consequently, the Tahsildar suggested for initiation of resumption proceedings. 5. Pursuant to the same, Balu Resumption Case No.6/1975 came to be registered. By order dated 21/08/1975, the Collector, Puri after considering the report of the Tahsildar, determined the lease by observing that the lessee had violated the terms of the lease agreement under clause 9 & 20 as prescribed under the Bihar and Orissa Government Estates Manual, 1919 and directed the lessee to surrender the lease hold land within 30 days from the date of notice. Accordingly, notice came to be issued to the lessee Nalininath Mitra on 22/08/1975, directing him to surrender the lease hold land after removing the structures within 30 days from the date of notice, failing which the Tahsildar would re-enter and take possession. Subsequently, the Collector after visiting the site and noting that the building is in utter state of disrepair passed an order on 17/09/1976 in Balu Resumption Case No.6/1975 directing the Tahsildar, 3Puri to take physical possession of the land and remove the standing structures. On 24/09/1976, the Tahsildar took over the physical possession of the lease hold land along with the building. CASE OF THE PLAINTIFFS/RESPONDENTS 6. In the aforesaid factual scenario, the plaintiffs/respondents herein i.e. legal heirs of Jatindranath Mitra (another son of original lessee) filed a suit for declaration and permanent injunction in OS No.161/402-90/86 praying for declaration that the order of the Collector dated 21/08/1975 in Resumption Case No.6/1975 as illegal, without jurisdiction and to direct the Collector to renew the lease and pass a decree directing the defendant/appellant herein to execute and register a lease deed in respect of the suit property by way of renewal in favour of the plaintiffs, and to pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the defendant from leasing out the suit property to others. 7. It was the case of the plaintiffs that being the legal heirs and successors of original lessee, Late Shailendra Nath Mitra, the lease had been renewed in their favour in 1944 for a period of 30 years commencing from 26/09/1935 and a suit for partition had been filed in Suit No.1377/1967 before the Calcutta High Court wherein a receiver came to be appointed in respect of the suit property, 4who had applied for further renewal of the lease in respect of the suit land and no action was taken by the defendant/appellant herein and subsequently, Nalininath Mitra (one of the lessees) had also applied for renewal of lease in the year 1972 and he had expired on 13/12/1975 and on 23/12/1975 advocate of Late Nalininath Mitra replied to a letter issued by Tahsildar by intimating the death of Nalininath Mitra and had prayed that the application for renewal filed be treated to have been made on behalf of Khagendrabala Mitra and Jatindranath Mitra, the mother and brother of Nalininath Mitra respectively. In the partition suit, the suit properties were exclusively allotted to the share of the plaintiffs/respondents herein vide decree dated 10/12/1973 and as such the plaintiffs had approached the authorities for the renewal of the lease, in the year 1980 for which, no reply was furnished to them. Further when they made enquiries in 1983, they came to know that the defendant/appellant had initiated suo moto proceedings in the year 1975 and without issuing notice to the plaintiffs, the lease had been determined on 21/08/1975. On the basis of these averments, the plaintiff sought for decreeing the suit. CASE OF THE DEFENDANT/APPELLANT 8. The defendant/appellant herein filed their written statement denying the averments made in the plaint. It was the case of the defendant that suit property 5was originally leased to one Shailendra Nath Mitra for 30 years on 26/09/1905 and after the expiry of the lease on 25/09/1935, the original lessee applied for renewal of the lease. The original lessee expired in the year 1942 and the suit property came to be mutated in the name of his legal heirs and subsequently the lease came to be renewed in favour of his legal heirs on 22/01/1944. It was further pleaded that pendency of partition suit, appointment of receiver was not within the knowledge of the defendant. It was further stated that receiver did not apply for the renewal of the lease, whereas late Nalininath Mitra had applied for the same on 23/12/1972 which could not be sanctioned as necessary documents were not filed and no application had been filed by other lessees. It was further contended that lease hold land came to be resumed and lease came to be determined as the lessee violated the conditions of the lease. On these amongst other averments made in the written statement, the defendant sought for dismissal of the suit. FINDINGS OF THE TRIAL COURT 9. The Learned Trial Court framed the following 6 issues for its determination. a. Is the suit maintainable in law? b. Is the suit property correctly described? c. Is the order passed in Resumption Case No.6/75 illegal, void and without jurisdiction? 6d. Are the plaintiffs entitled to renewal of the lease? e. Are the plaintiffs entitled to a decree of permanent injunction? f. To what relief are the plaintiffs entitled?

--- JUDGMENT 434 ---
10. The Trial Court after analysing the facts and evaluating the evidence tendered by both parties, dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs by arriving at a conclusion that plaintiffs had not applied for the renewal of the lease within three months before the expiry of the lease period; that the plaintiffs had not kept the building in proper repair; and all the lessees had not applied for the renewal of the lease except Nalininath Mitra. FINDINGS OF THE FIRST APPELLATE COURT 11. Against the dismissal of the suit, the plaintiffs filed an appeal before the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Puri in Title Appeal No.2/100 of 1992/1991. The First Appellate Court by its judgment and decree dated 23/12/1992 allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the Trial Court on the following grounds: a) The resumption proceedings could not have been initiated by the Collector without referring the matter to the Civil Court; b) The land leased can be resumed only if the land is required for public purpose; 7c) PW1 and PW2 have deposed that the building is in a habitable condition and no rebuttable evidence was placed on record; d) Balu Resumption Case No.6/1975 could not have been initiated without first deciding Lease Renewal Case No.11/1972. FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT 12. Aggrieved by the order of the First Appellate Court, the defendant/appellant herein preferred a second appeal before the High Court of Orissa, Cuttack in Second Appeal No.98/1993 and the High Court while admitting the appeal framed the following substantial question of law: “Whether the period of lease having expired long since and not been renewed, the impugned judgment of the lower appellate court is at all sustainable in law and whether the lower appellate court is justified in holding that Government cannot take possession of the land even though it has held earlier that the State can resume possession in accordance with law”. 13. The High Court after hearing both the parties dismissed the second appeal of the defendant/appellant by answering the substantial question of law in favour of plaintiff/respondent by assigning the following reasons: a. There was no material before the Collector to arrive at a conclusion that Clause 9 of the lease deed had been violated. b. The defendant did not bring any material on record before the Trial Court to show that the determination of lease made 8by Collector was in accordance with Clause 15 of the lease deed. c. The renewal application could not have been rejected otherwise without recording a finding that the lessee had not duly observed and performed all the conditions of the lease. d. The State had not brought on record any material to show that there was any specific public purpose for which the land was required as provided under Rule 28 of the Bihar and Orissa Government Estate Manual, 1919 for returning the land. e. Unilateral resumption cannot be sustained when the lessor has not approached the common law forum for determination of the lease. 14. Assailing the aforesaid judgement and decree, the State/appellant herein filed special leave petition and this Court by Order dated 31/10/2011 had granted leave to appeal. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 435 ---
We have heard, Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant-State and Ms. Fereshte D. Sethna, learned counsel appearing for the respondents. The prime contentions urged by the respective learned Advocates are as under:- CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 16. It is submitted that, when the lease expired on 25/09/1965 and the legal heirs of the original lessee did not take any steps for filing any application for 9renewal of the lease till 22/12/1972 and only on 23/12/1972, one of the lessees namely Nalininath Mitra had preferred an application for renewal of the lease, question of considering said application does not arise at all. 16.1 It is contended that Tahsildar, after conducting field verification had submitted a report to the Collector on 30/05/1975, indicating thereunder that the structures over the suit land was dilapidated and outsiders had occupied the land. It is also contended that the said report clearly indicates the violation of Clauses 9, 19 & 20 of the Bihar & Orissa Government Estates Manual, 1919 and these clauses when read together would clearly demonstrate that State is empowered to determine the lease and resume the property so leased. 16.2 It is further contended that one of the lessee, namely Nalininath Mitra himself has admitted the condition of the building being dilapidated in his letter addressed to the Collector, Puri dated 06/10/1975 which establishes violation of Clause 9 of the Manual of 2019 and there was no further material required to be placed on record. It is also contended that in the same letter, the lessee has accepted that lease rent and municipal taxes could not be paid to the Government for last several years which was in clear violation of Clause 15 and 16 of the Manual of 2019, which mandates the lessee has to pay the rent as 10well as the Municipal Tax as assessed periodically and by relying upon said letter he assails the impugned order. 16.3 It is further contended that non-fulfilment of condition stipulated in Clause 14 of the Bihar & Orissa Government Estates Manual, 1919 enables the Collector to determine the lease and accordingly the lease has been determined based on the report of the Tahsildar and the admission of the lessee regarding the violation of clause 9 in his letter dated: 06.10.1975. 16.4 It is further urged that suit of the plaintiffs was barred by limitation as the suit was filed in the year 1986 i.e., 10 years after the order of the Collector taking possession of the suit land. 16.5 It is further contended that High Court erred in proceeding on the basis of Clause 9 and 15 of the lease agreement having not been violated by plaintiffs though facts depicted otherwise. 16.6 It is further contended that resumption of the lease was on the ground of violation of Clause 9 of the lease agreement ''due to dilapidated condition of the building'' and not on the ground of violation of Clause 9 of the lease agreement which speaks about ''Sanitary Improvements''. The letter of one of 11the lessee is a clear admission that the building was in a dilapidated condition and the said document has not been considered by the High Court. 16.7 It is contended that the resumption case was initiated due to violation of clause 9 and 19 of the Manual, 1919 and not on the ground that the land was required for any public purpose as contemplated under Rule 28(5) of the Manual,1919 and Rule 28 had no application to the case on hand. 16.8 It is contended that right of the lessee under Clause 18 of the lease agreement can only be considered if the lessee had duly observed and performed all the conditions of the lease, and in the instant case no rent was paid, municipal taxes were not paid, the structures were in a dilapidated condition and outsiders were in possession of the property which were in blatant violation of the terms of the lease. As such the lease was determined and possession of the lessee was declared as illegal under clause 19 of the Manual of 2019 due to violation of the terms and conditions of the lease and possession of leased land was resumed. 16.9 It is contended that High Court had not considered the notice of the Collector dated 28/08/1975 and the reply thereto furnished by one of the lessees on 06/10/1975. 1216.10 It is contended that no document was tendered before the Trial Court to demonstrate that a receiver had been appointed by the High Court in Suit No.1377/1965 and application had been filed by the receiver for renewal of the lease. On the above grounds, the appellant sought for allowing the appeal. CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS 17. It is contended that the application for renewal of the lease submitted by Nalininath Mitra on 23/12/1972 has not been adjudicated and is pending till date and without disposing of the renewal application, the appellant/State could not have initiated and adjudicated resumption proceedings No.6/75 as such the resumption order was declared illegal by the appellate court and rightly so. 17.1 It is urged that the option of renewal has been left with the lessee and not with the khasmahal authorities as per Clause 18 of the lease deed and this option had been exercised by the lessee and without adjudicating the same, lease could not have been determined. 17.2 It is further contended that the respondents have the right of renewal as they have not violated any of the terms & conditions of the lease. 1317.3 It is submitted that no material had been placed on record by State to support the finding of the Tahsildar that the building was in a dilapidated condition or it was not habitable and one sided report of Tahsildar could not be relied upon. 17.4 It is urged that the resumption of possession can only be taken under due process of law i.e. by way of filing a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction as per Clause 20 of the Bihar and Orissa Estates Manual 1919. The action of the appellant in adopting extra judicial methods to unilaterally resume possession is clearly mala fide, illegal and contrary to the law. 17.5 It is submitted that, even assuming that the land was required for any public purpose as indicated in the resumption order, no such material was brought on record to show that there was any specific purpose for which the land was required by the Government. Further reliance was placed on the judgment passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Orissa in the matter of Shankarlal Verma and Others v Smt. Uma Sahu and Others [1992 SCC Online Ori 239] to contend that lease deed could only be determined in the case of requirement of the land for a public purpose or breach of the conditions of the lease. It was further urged that the lease deed cannot be cancelled when the lease deed does not provide that upon expiry of the term, the lease shall stand 14determined and by relying upon the judgment of the First Appellate court, he has sought for upholding of the same 17.6 It is urged that none of the terms of the lease having been violated by the lessee, the lease ought not to have been determined by the State and on the above grounds, the respondents sought for dismissal of the appeal by defending the impugned judgment. POINTS FOR CONSIDERATION 18.

--- JUDGMENT 436 ---
RE: POINT NO.1 19. The lease agreement came to be executed in favour of original lessee on 29.09.1905 for 30 years and after expiry on 29.09.1935 it came to be renewed on 22.01.1944 for a period of 30 years with effect from 26/09/1935. The said lease expired on 26/09/1965 and none of the lessees took any steps for renewal till 22/12/1972. On 23/12/1972, one of the lessees namely Late Nalininath Mitra preferred an application for renewal of lease in Lease Renewal 15Case No.11/1972. On two occasions dated 23/12/1972 and 09/05/1973, the Revenue Officer, Puri directed Late Nalininath Mitra to file relevant documents i.e. Lease agreement, Khasmahal rent receipts, Municipal Tax receipts and sanctioned building plan, for verification. Since the lessee failed to produce the documents, the revenue officer directed the case records be sent to the Tahsildar, Puri for enquiry and report. Pursuant to the order of the Revenue Officer, the Tahsildar conducted an enquiry and submitted a report to the Collector, Puri on 30/05/1975. On basis of the said report, Balu Resumption Case No.6/1975 came to be registered and the Collector, Puri resumed the lease hold land by order dated 21/08/1975 by determining the lease. Subsequently, notice came to be issued on 22/08/1975 directing the lessee to handover possession of the land after removing the structure etc within 30 days. Thereafter, Collector passed an order on 17/09/1976 in Balu Resumption Case No.6/1975 directing the Tehsildar, Puri to take physical possession of the land and remove the standing structures. On the basis of said order Tahsildar took physical possession of the subject land along with the building. The order of the Collector dated 21/08/1975 was the subject matter of challenge before the Trial Court in TS No.161/402 - 90/86. 20. It is pertinent to delve into various clauses of the lease agreement which have been relied upon by the State for determining the lease as it will have a 16direct bearing in this appeal and the claim made in the suit. Clause 15 of the lease agreement gives the power to the Collector to declare that the lease as void and determine the lease deed, on breach or non-observance of any of the terms or conditions of the lease agreement. Clause 15 reads as under: “(15) That on breach or non-observance of any of aforesaid terms or conditions, the Collector may declare that the Lease has determined and become void, that an order of the Collector declaring that there has been such breach or non-observance at between the parties here to and that on the expiry of one month from the date of such order the Collector or any officer or person appointed in that behalf by the Collector shall be entitled to take possession of the land lease and the buildings erected thereon. PROVIDED that the Collector shall at the time of such declaration, either offer to pay reasonable compensation for the structures and other improvements made with the consent of the Collector or direct the LESSEES to remove the structures or other improvement within a specified time and, if the LESSEES fail to remove them accordingly, the Collector shall cause such removal to he effected and recover the cost from the LESSEES. Where compensation is offered, the amount of such compensation shall be fixed by the Collector whose decision shall be final, conclusive and binding on the Lessees, subject to revision by the Revenue Commissioner.” Clause 7 of the agreement mandates the lessee to keep the building in proper repair and lessee is prohibited from making any structural alterations in or additions to the building. Clause 7 reads as under: “(7) That the Lessees shall keep the building in Proper repair and shall not make any structural alterations in or additions to them of any kind whatever either inside or outside the building without the previous Written consent of the Collector” 17Clause 12 mandates the lessees to pay rent before the date fixed for such payments and failure to do so attracts interest @ 10% p.a. Clause 12 reads as under: “(12) That, in the event of the Lessees’ not paying any instalment of the rent on or before the dates herein fixed for such payments, the Lessees shall, in addition to the arrears, pay interest at the rate of ten per cent per annum on such arrears.” Clause 13 mandates the lessee to pay all Municipal or other local rates and taxes imposed or assessed upon their holding under any law for the time being in force and it reads as under: “(13) That the Lessees shall pay all Municipal or other local rates and taxes imposed or assessed upon their holding under any law for the time being in force whether the same be payable by the landlord, tenant, owner or occupier in respect thereof.” “(14) If three months prior to the expiration of the said term the lessee shall notify the Collector/Deputy Commissioner that he is desirous of taking a new lease of the said premises and shall have duly observed and performed all the terms and conditions aforesaid he shall be entitled to a new lease for such term and on such rent enhanced or otherwise and on such terms and conditions as the Collector/Deputy Commissioner or in the event of disagreement the Commissioner may deem proper. In the event of the lessee not taking a new lease as aforesaid he shall not be entitled to any compensation for any buildings or improvements on the said premises or otherwise.” Clause 14 indicates that where lessee is desirous of taking a new lease is required to notify the Collector/Deputy Commissioner 3 months prior to the expiration of the terms specified in the lease deed after having duly observed 18and performed the terms and conditions and this enables or gives a right to the lessee to seek for new lease. 21. It is the contention of the appellant that Clause 7, 12, 13 and 14 of the lease agreement had been violated by the lessee. Whereas the said contention have been denied by the respondents. When the report of the Tahsildar submitted on 30/05/1975 is perused, it is evident that the structures located over the suit land was in a dilapidated condition and outsiders had occupied the land. The said findings would get further strengthened by the admission of one of the lessees i.e., Late Nalininath, who by his letter dated 06/10/1975 has admitted this fact. Further in the same letter, the lessee has accepted that lease rent and municipal taxes could not be paid to the government for the last several years. For immediate reference said letter is extended hereinbelow: “To The Collector, Puri Puri District Office, Revenue Section, Puri ORISSA Reference your Notice No. 6263/REV Dated 22.08.1975 Reference your notice above I beg to say that due to bad circumstances the Municipal Tax of the property could not be paid for the last several years, nor the lease rent has been paid to the Government. For paucity of fund the building could not be kept in a habitable state. The building was constructed at great cost and the present condition is due to vagaries of weather and people. I have thought it fit with 19your kind permission to transfer the lease and the property thereof to Sri Raghunath Chattorai of Narayangarh, District Puri, on condition that clears up all the dues of the Municipality. Lease rent of the Government and pays the transfer fees as may be determined by you and has reimbursed me for any compensation that may be due to me from Government and has already paid Municipal Tax on my behalf and further has paid me sum of Rs. 6075/- as advance against consideration money, which is to be refunded if no transfer permit is given by you. Further he should bind himself to the Government to repair the old buildings and/or exact new buildings in accordance to your plan and within a stipulated time as may be fixed by you. I now, therefore, most humbly pray that you will kindly transfer the lease to the said Raghunath Chattorai. Sd/- Nalini Nath Mitra 6.10.75 //TRUE COPY// In the light of above admission, we are of the considered view that Clause 7, 12 and 13 of the lease agreement were blatantly violated and not adhered to by the lessee. This being the case, the appellant/State had all the right to declare the lease as void and determine the lease under Clause 15 of the agreement. The High Court under the impugned judgement erred in arriving at a conclusion that defendant had not placed any material on record to demonstrate that determination of lease made by Collector was not in accordance with Clause 15 of the lease deed. When the lessee himself has admitted about non- compliance of the terms of the lease, shifting the burden on the State to prove 20that building was in dilapidated condition or rent was not paid and municipal taxes were not remitted does not abide. 22. The argument of the respondents (plaintiff) that the option of renewal has been left with the lessee needs to be considered in light of Clause 20 of the Bihar & Orissa Government Estates Manual, 1919 and Clauses 15 and 16 of the lease agreement. Clause 20 of the Bihar & Orissa Government Estates Manual, 1919 reads as under: (20) That on the expiry of the terms of your lease, you shall, if you have duly observed and performed all the conditions of the lease, execute a new lease for such period and on such rent and containing such other terms and conditions as the Collector may then deem proper. If you decline to accept a new lease on the terms and conditions stated above, then the Collector may from the date of expiry of the present lease enter on and take possession of the land and of all buildings erected thereon, provided that in such case you shall be entitled to compensation for houses erected and other improvements made in the land with the consent of the Collector, the amount of such compensation to the fixed by the Collector whose decision shall be final, conclusive and binding on you.’’ Clause 15 and 16 of the lease agreement reads as under: “(15) That on breach or non-observance of any of aforesaid terms or conditions, the Collector may declare that the Lease has determined and become void, that an order of the Collector declaring that there has been such breach or non-observance at between the parties here to and that on the expiry of one month from the date of such order the Collector or any officer or person appointed in that behalf by the Collector shall be entitled to take possession of the land lease and the buildings erected thereon. 21PROVIDED that the Collector shall at the time of such declaration, either offer to pay reasonable compensation for the structures and other improvements made with the consent of the Collector or direct the LESSEES to remove the structures or other improvement within a specified time and, if the LESSEES fail to remove them accordingly, the Collector shall cause such removal to he effected and recover the cost from the LESSEES. Where compensation is offered, the amount of such compensation shall be fixed by the Collector whose decision shall be final, conclusive and binding on the Lessees, subject to revision by the Revenue Commissioner.” (16) That in the event of breach or non-observance of any of the aforesaid terms or conditions in addition to or in lieu of any other remedy to which the Collector may be entitled the LESSEES shall be subject to a penalty to be imposed by the Collector which shall not exceed half the yearly rental.” A perusal of these two clauses would disclose that the said option of renewal is not unrestricted and can only be exercised by the lessee after having duly observed and performed all the conditions of the lease. From the perusal of the report submitted by the Tahsildar on 30/05/1975 and the letter dated 06/10/1975 by the lessee, it is evident that multiple terms and conditions of the lease have been breached by the lessees. This being the case, the appellant/State had rightly not renewed the lease as per Clause 20 of the Manual, 1919 and Clause 16 of the lease agreement. 23. The reliance placed by the respondents on the judgement of the High Court of Orissa in Shankarlal Verma and Others v Smt. Uma Sahu and 22Others (supra) would not come to their rescue as the terms and conditions of the lease have been squarely breached and not adhered to by the lessees in the present case. As such the lease came to be determined in the present case even though the lease deed does not provide anywhere that upon expiry of the term, the lease shall be determined. 24. Yet another fact which cannot go unnoticed is that on expiration of the lease on 25.09.1965, the legal heirs of the original lessee did not take steps for renewal by filing an application, much less 3 months prior to the expiration of the term as required under clause 14. On the other hand, such renewal was sought only on 23.12.1972, that too by one of the lessees that is Mr. Nalininath Mitra by filing an application for renewal of the lease which undisputedly is not adjudicated or disposed of till date. For this reason, we have opined that the State would be at liberty to consider the said application on its own merits and as rightly stated by Mr. Jaideep Gupta, Learned Senior Advocate appearing for the State that same would be considered on its merits.

--- JUDGMENT 437 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 369 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2379 OF 2024 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 4912 OF 2022) ACHIN GUPTA ……APPELLANT VERSUS STATE OF HARYANA & ANR. ……RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 1. Leave granted. 2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana dated 05.04.2022 in the Criminal Main No. 14198-2022 (CRM-M-14198-2022) filed by the Appellant herein (sole accused in the chargesheet) by which the High Court rejected the petition & thereby declined to quash the chargesheet dated 13.10.2021 for the offences punishable under Section 323, 406, 498A and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, the “IPC”) arising from the First Information Report No. 95 of 2021 lodged by the Page 1 of 36Respondent No. 2 (wife of the Appellant) at the Urban Estate Hisar Police Station, District Hisar. FACTUAL MATRIX 3. The FIR dated 09.04.2021 reads thus: - “1. That the First Informant Tanu Gupta wife of Achin Gupta and daughter of Harish Manocha, is a resident of House No.1368, Urban Estate - 2, Hisar, Tehsil and District Hisar and is a peace loving and law abiding woman and my marriage was solemnized according to Hindu rites and rituals with Accused No.1 on 09.10.2008 at New Delhi. My family had spent about thirty lakhs rupees in my engagement ceremony and marriage as per the direction of the accused persons towards furniture, jewellery, clothes and other household articles. At the time of marriage, my family handed over all her jewellery and stridhan to the accused persons saying that it is the stridhan of the first informant and whenever the first informant will need her stridhan, it has to be given back to her whereupon the accused persons assured the family of the first informant that whenever the first informant will need it, they will give it back to her. 2. That after the marriage, the first informant and Accused No.1 lived as husband and wife at B-39, Phase-2, Vikas Nagar, Hastsaal, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi 110059 and the first informant performed all the duties of a wife and out of the said wedlock a boy, namely, Advay aged 8 years was born, who is presently residing with Accused No.1. 3. That after few days of the marriage, when the first informant went to her matrimonial house at that time the Accused persons taunted that your family has lowered down our image in the society and before relatives by giving less dowry and said to the first informant that at least your family should have given a big car in the dowry because Accused No.1 is doing a good job and almost earns Rs. 1,50,000/- monthly and for him, we were getting Page 2 of 36proposal from rich families who would have spent cores of rupees on the marriage. On this the first informant said that her family had already given 5 lakhs rupees in cash for purchasing the car and have already spent more than their capability and now they cannot fulfil your demand for more dowry whereupon accused persons threatened the first informant saying that if you want to live with us then you have to get our above demand for the dowry fulfilled by your parents otherwise you will not be allowed to live in this house. 4. That whenever the first informant cooked food in the matrimonial home, the accused persons always used to point out unnecessary defects in the food and taunted the first informant that she does not know cooking. To harass and upset the first informant, the accused persons deliberately asked her to make various dishes and when the first informant showed her inability, the accused persons used to abuse and beat her. 5. That Accused No.3 is the mother-in-law of the first informant, who is a teacher and she used to leave the house at 7:00 hrs in the morning for the school and the first informant used to do all household works and when her mother-in-law returned from the school, she deliberately used to point out defects in her work and used to taunt the first informant that your family should have given gold bangles to me and now, you would have to bring gold bangles from your family and when the first informant tell her that her family had already spent a lot over her marriage, then she used to abuse and give beatings to the first informant. 6. That Accused No.4 is the sister-in-law of the first informant who used to say that your family should have given a diamond set for me in the marriage which they have not given and now if you want to live in this house you have to bring diamond set for me otherwise I will not let you live in the house and besides this, Accused No.4 treated the first informant like a domestic servant and used to abuse and give beatings to the first informant over petty issues and instigated the other members of the family against the first informant. That the first informant always performed the Page 3 of 36duties of an ideal wife with utmost honesty and sincerity and the first informant had always lived with Accused No.1 with love and always fulfils his demands and demands of the other accused persons. That the first informant used to do all household work at her matrimonial house in whatever manner the accused persons used to ask her. In this way, there is no fault on the part of the first informant. That Accused No.1 had never treated the first informant with love and care rather he used to treat the first informant with cruelty. Beating and abusing the first informant on account of demand of dowry was a daily routine of the Accused persons. 7.

--- JUDGMENT 438 ---
That Accused No. 5 is the brother-in-law of the first informant and he resides in Delhi. After the marriage he used to come to the matrimonial house of the first informant alongwith Accused No. 4 and used to instigate Accused No. 1 to 3 against the first informant. When the first informant used to oppose this he used to hurl abuses to the first informant. 9. That during this period the Accused persons have beaten the first informant multiple times for demand of dowry and whenever the accused persons threw out the first informant out of the house every time the family of the Petitioner used Page 4 of 36to come along with panchas of the society and sat with the Accused persons and in every meeting at least something was given to the Accused persons but the Accused persons neither left their demand for dowry nor they changed their behaviour. 10. That on 02.03.2012 a son Advay was born to the first informant, the Accused persons said to the first informant that now in the traditional gifts you have to fulfil our demand for dowry. In the traditional gift the family of the first informant gave 5 tolas of gold ornaments, 51 thousand rupees in cash, and spent about 1 lakh rupees on clothing, sweets and other items. But the Accused persons were not satisfied with the articles gifted at that time and were adamant on their demand.

--- JUDGMENT 439 ---
11. That when the first informant was at her matrimonial house she was posted on the post of Assistant Professor in a college at Delhi but Accused No. 1 to 3 used to snatch the whole salary of the first informant and even did not give pocket money to the first informant. Whenever the first informant demanded pocket money from Accused No. 1 he used to beat her and said that you take your expenses from your family. It is pertinent to mention here that even after the marriage the family of the first informant many times gave pocket money and money for other expenses. Before going for her job the first informant used to do all household work and prepared lunch after waking up early in the morning and then she went to the college and after returning in the evening she used to do all household work. 12. That after the marriage, Accused No.3 and 4 pressurized the first informant that you have to wear saree because according to the tradition, the daughters-in-law used to wear sarees. When the first informant said that I am not able to do the household chores while wearing saree, they both used to beat and abuse the first informant. 13. That in 2014, the first informant came to know that her husband Respondent No.1 is in illicit relationship with Vandana Sharma and when the first informant objected to this Accused No. 1 used to abuse and beat her and used to threaten that if you will tell this fact to anyone, I will kill Page 5 of 36you. It is pertinent to mention here that on 19.03.2019 when Accused No. 1 had taken the abovenamed Vandana Sharma on a tour to Jaipur, Rajasthan at that time the first informant and her brother reached Khaskoti Hotel, Jaipur and there they found both of them in a compromising position and objected to it, Accused No. 1 slapped the first informant and said that why have you brought your family here. At that time the first informant and her family did not initiate any legal proceedings against the Accused No.1 because Accused No.1 had assured that after today he would not meet Vandana Sharma and after this the first informant went to her matrimonial house alongwith Accused No.1. 14. That even after this Accused No. 1 used to talk with Vandana Sharma on phone and also met with her. While the first informant was at her matrimonial house, Accused No.1 filed a Divorce Petition on 25.07.2019 and which was filed on the basis of false and baseless grounds. In the said case when on 10.08.2019 a summon came at 6:30 in the morning, Accused No. 1 and 2 forcibly got the summons signed by the first informant and said that now we do not need you anymore and when the first informant objected to this, they had beaten the first informant. Thereafter the first informant called her father on phone and called him at her matrimonial house. Thereafter my family members came to my matrimonial house. Thereafter on 10.08.2019 the first informant filed an application against the Accused persons at Ranholla police station, Delhi and after that the first informant came to her parental house alongwith her father. Thereafter as per the order of the court the first informant again started living with Accused No. 1 at her matrimonial house. 15. That in March, 2020 during the pandemic of Covid-19, Accused No. 1 took the minor son with him and did not come home for so many days and before leaving the house Accused No. 1 had cut the water connection, and television connection of the house. Thereafter the first informant called her father on phone and called him at her house. Thereafter on 30.03.2020 the father of the first informant after getting the permission from police the father of the first informant brought her to her parental home from her Page 6 of 36matrimonial house. When the first informant informed Accused No. 1 over phone that I am going with my father then he said that who wants to keep you with him. Thereafter the family of the first informant held many meetings in the presence of elders and respectable members of the society and tried to convince the Accused persons that they should keep the first informant with them but the Accused persons were stubborn on their demands of dowry and had clearly refused to keep the first informant without fulfillment of their demand for dowry and when the first informant asked for her jewellery, stridhan and for her minor son, they clearly refused and threatened that if you file any complaint to the police against us we will kill the first informant. 16. That in this way, the Accused persons have ignored the first informant due to their dowry demand and they have even not returned the first informant her stridhan and are threatening that if without fulfilling their demand of dowry, the first informant comes to their house, they will kill her. Thus, by giving this complaint, a request is being made to take immediate action against the accused persons for demanding dowry, giving beatings and threatening me to kill and my stridhan be recovered from the accused persons. It will be so kind of you.” 4. The plain reading of the aforesaid FIR would indicate that the Appellant and his family members are alleged to have demanded dowry and thereby caused mental and physical trauma to the First Informant. As stated in the FIR, the family of the First Informant had spent a large sum at the time of marriage and had also handed over her ‘stridhan’ to the Appellant and his family. However, shortly after marriage, the Appellant and his family started harassing the First Informant on the false pretext that she had failed to discharge her duties as a wife and daughter-in-law and also pressurised her for some more dowry. The Appellant is alleged to be an alcoholic and used to regularly raise Page 7 of 36his hands on the First Informant and treat her inhumanely. Allegedly, upon complaining to the Appellant’s father and mother (Accused Nos. 2 & 3 in the FIR), they would take the side of their son i.e., the Appellant herein and would pressurize the First Informant to get something more towards dowry. 5. The First Informant has further alleged that her sister-in-law (Accused No. 4 in the FIR) used to harass her for a diamond set & would threaten that failing to get one, she would be driven out of her matrimonial home. 6. The First Informant was serving as an Assistant Professor and has alleged that the Appellant and his family would keep her entire salary. The Appellant would assault her whenever she would ask for money, saying that the First Informant should ask her family to bear her personal expenses. 7. It is also alleged that the Appellant was having an extra marital affair with one another woman, and he would threaten the First Informant with dire consequences had she told anyone of his affair. The Appellant continued with the extra marital affair for a long period & later filed a divorce petition in July 2019 on absolutely false and baseless grounds. 8. It is further alleged that during the initial days of the Covid-19 lockdown, the Appellant disconnected the water supply at their matrimonial home and took away their minor son. In such circumstances, the First Informant was left with no option but to leave her matrimonial home and return to her parents. Efforts Page 8 of 36were made for some settlement however the Appellant and his family kept on insisting for more dowry and also refused to return her stridhan. 9. Upon the FIR referred to above being registered, the police carried out the investigation & proceeded to file chargesheet dated 13.10.2021, only against the Appellant herein. A closure report was filed against the remaining 4 accused. The filing of the chargesheet culminated in the Criminal Case No. CHI/1856/2021in the court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Hisar. 10. The Appellant herein went before the High Court, with a quashing petition for the purpose of getting the criminal proceedings quashed. The High Court vide its judgment & order dated 05.04.2022 (‘impugned order’), declined to quash the criminal proceedings in exercise of its inherent powers under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short, the “CrPC”). The High Court made the following observations: - “I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at length and have gone through the record carefully. The main thrust of the arguments raised by counsel for the petitioner is that the complainant had never been interested in living in the matrimonial home and she kept on pressurizing the petitioner for living separately from his family members. In order to achieve her objective she kept on causing harassment to the petitioner and his family members. However, a perusal of the allegations in the FIR would show that the petitioner and the family members gave taunting to the complainant for lowering down their image in the society. Demand of a car was also made. Complainant was taunted for not having been Page 9 of 36incurred sufficient expenditure on marriage by her parents. There are allegations of beating the complainant by her husband and the other family members. It has been specifically alleged that the petitioner is an alcoholic and has illicit relations with one Vandana Sharma . The Hon'ble Supreme Court has settled the law time and again regarding exercising the jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC for quashing of FIR. A reference in this regard may be made to the law settled in case of State of Haryana vs Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, wherein following parameters have been given:- “102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the power under Article 226 of the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we have given the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised:- (1) where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused; (2) where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any, accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Page 10 of 36Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code; (3) where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused; (4) where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code; (5) where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused; (6) where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party; (7) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge." Further, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 440 ---
Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2021 SCC Online SC 315 has held that quashing of FIR is an exception rather than an ordinary rule and Page 11 of 36the High Court should exercise the powers under Section 482 CrPC sparingly with circumspection. Taking into consideration the above facts and circumstances of the present case in the light of the law settled, the present case does not fall in the category of cases for invoking the inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC The parameters laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court mandate that in a case where from the bare reading of the allegations in the FIR no cognizable offence is made out or it has been lodged to wreak the vengeance then the High Court may intervene. The veracity of the allegations levelled by the complainant can be assessed only after a thorough investigation and thereafter by the Trial Court on the basis of the evidence led before it. Thus, this Court is of the opinion that the case of the petitioner does not qualify for exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC Resultantly, the petition being devoid of any merit is hereby dismissed.” (Emphasis supplied) 11. In view of the aforesaid, the Appellant is before this Court with the present appeal. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 12. Mr. Yusuf, the learned counsel appearing for the Appellant herein made the following submissions: -  The Appellant and his family had filed a divorce petition and also a domestic violence case against the First Informant in 2019 and 2020 respectively. As a counter blast to the same, the FIR No. 95 of 2021 dated 09.04.2021 came to be lodged after a period of more than 11 months from Page 12 of 36the date the First Informant left her matrimonial home and that too, only after the service of summons to her in the domestic violence case. No plausible explanation has been offered for such delay.  The FIR was filed with an oblique motive & by way of vengeance towards the Appellant. The First Informant and Appellant were married for over 12 years.  The allegations in the FIR are too vague and general in nature. There is no specific allegation/incident of harassment levelled against the Appellant in the FIR. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE FIRST INFORMANT/RESPONDENT NO. 2 13.

--- JUDGMENT 441 ---
The Appellant and the Respondent No. 2 got married in October 2008. The couple lived together for more than a decade and in the wedlock a child was born in March 2012. 17. We take notice of the fact that the Appellant filed a divorce petition in July 2019 on the ground of cruelty. The divorce petition was withdrawn as the Page 14 of 36Appellant was finding it difficult to take care of his child, while travelling all the way to Hisar on the dates fixed by the Court. The Appellant’s mother had to file a domestic violence case against the First Informant in October 2020 under the provisions of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. 18. The plain reading of the FIR and the chargesheet papers indicate that the allegations levelled by the First Informant are quite vague, general and sweeping, specifying no instances of criminal conduct. It is also pertinent to note that in the FIR no specific date or time of the alleged offence/offences has been disclosed. Even the police thought fit to drop the proceedings against the other members of the Appellant’s family. Thus, we are of the view that the FIR lodged by the Respondent No. 2 was nothing but a counterblast to the divorce petition & also the domestic violence case. 19. It is also pertinent to note that the Respondent No. 2 lodged the FIR on 09.04.2021, i.e., nearly 2 years after the filing of the divorce petition by the Appellant and 6 months after the filing of the domestic violence case by her mother-in-law. Thus, the First Informant remained silent for nearly 2 years after the divorce petition was filed. With such an unexplained delay in filing the FIR, we find that the same was filed only to harass the Appellant and his family members. 20. It is now well settled that the power under Section 482 of the CrPC has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution, only where such exercise is justified by the tests laid down in the Section itself. It is also well settled that Page 15 of 36Section 482 of the CrPC does not confer any new power on the High Court but only saves the inherent power, which the Court possessed before the enactment of the Criminal Procedure Code. There are three circumstances under which the inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely (i) to give effect to an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of Court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. 21. The investigation of an offence is the field exclusively reserved for the Police Officers, whose powers in that field are unfettered, so long as the power to investigate into the cognizable offence is legitimately exercised in strict compliance with the provisions under Chapter XII of the CrPC. While exercising powers under Section 482 of the CrPC, the court does not function as a Court of appeal or revision. As noted above, the inherent jurisdiction under the Section, although wide, yet should be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist. The authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has the power to prevent such abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers, the court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that the initiation or continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of Page 16 of 36court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto. 22. Once the investigation is over and chargesheet is filed, the FIR pales into insignificance. The court, thereafter, owes a duty to look into all the materials collected by the investigating agency in the form of chargesheet. There is nothing in the words of Section 482 of the CrPC which restricts the exercise of the power of the court to prevent the abuse of process of court or miscarriage of justice only to the stage of the FIR. It would be a travesty of justice to hold that the proceedings initiated against a person can be interfered with at the stage of FIR but not if it has materialized into a chargesheet. 23.

--- JUDGMENT 442 ---
v. Vangaveeti Nagaiah, reported in (2009) 12 SCC 466 : AIR 2009 SC 2646, interpreted clause (iii) referred to above, observing thus: - “6. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by this Court in State of Haryana v . Bhajan Lal [1992 Supp (1) SCC 335]. A note of caution was, however, added that the power should be exercised sparingly and that too in rarest of rare cases. The illustrative categories indicated by this Court are as follows: Page 18 of 36“(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the F.I.R. or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused. (4) Where the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a Police Officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. Page 19 of 36(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.” (Emphasis Supplied) 25. If a person is made to face a criminal trial on some general and sweeping allegations without bringing on record any specific instances of criminal conduct, it is nothing but abuse of the process of the court. The court owes a duty to subject the allegations levelled in the complaint to a thorough scrutiny to find out, prima facie, whether there is any grain of truth in the allegations or whether they are made only with the sole object of involving certain individuals in a criminal charge, more particularly when a prosecution arises from a matrimonial dispute. 26.

--- JUDGMENT 443 ---
In Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand, reported in 2010 Criminal Law Journal 4303 (1), this Court observed the following: - “28. It is a matter of common knowledge that unfortunately matrimonial litigation is rapidly increasing in our country. All the courts in our country including this court are flooded with matrimonial cases. This clearly demonstrates discontent and unrest in the family life of a large number of people of the society. 29. The courts are receiving a large number of cases emanating from section 498-A of the Penal Code, 1860 which reads as under: “498-A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.-Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be Page 20 of 36punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, ‘cruelty’ means: (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or (b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.” 30. It is a matter of common experience that most of these complaints under section 498-A IPC are filed in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper deliberations. We come across a large number of such complaints which are not even bona fide and are filed with oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a matter of serious concern. 31. The learned members of the Bar have enormous social responsibility and obligation to ensure that the social fiber of family life is not ruined or demolished. They must ensure that exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be reflected in the criminal complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either on their advice or with their concurrence. The learned members of the Bar who belong to a noble profession must maintain its noble traditions and should treat every complaint under section 498-A as a basic human problem and must make serious endeavour to help the parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that human problem. They must discharge their duties to the best of their abilities to ensure that social fiber, peace and tranquility of the society remains intact. The Page 21 of 36members of the Bar should also ensure that one complaint should not lead to multiple cases. 32. Unfortunately, at the time of filing of the complaint the implications and consequences are not properly visualized by the complainant that such complaint can lead to insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the complainant, accused and his close relations. 33. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and punish the guilty and protect the innocent To find out the truth is a herculean task in majority of these complaints. The tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate relations is also not uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult to ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious in dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic realities into consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's close relations who had been living in different cities and never visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant resided would have an entirely different complexion. The allegations of the complaint are required to be scrutinized with great care and circumspection. Experience reveals that long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour, acrimony and bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is also a matter of common knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband or the husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it would ruin the chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of suffering is extremely long and painful. 34. Before parting with this case, we would like to observe that a serious relook of the entire provision is warranted by the legislation. It is also a matter of common knowledge that exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a large number of complaints. The tendency of over implication is also reflected in a very large number of cases. Page 22 of 3635. The criminal trials lead to immense sufferings for all concerned. Even ultimate acquittal in the trial may also not be able to wipe out the deep scars of suffering of ignominy. Unfortunately a large number of these complaints have not only flooded the courts but also have led to enormous social unrest affecting peace, harmony and happiness of the society. It is high time that the legislature must take into consideration the pragmatic realities and make suitable changes in the existing law. It is imperative for the legislature to take into consideration the informed public opinion and the pragmatic realities in consideration and make necessary changes in the relevant provisions of law. We direct the Registry to send a copy of this judgment to the Law Commission and to the Union Law Secretary, Government of India who may place it before the Hon'ble Minister for Law and Justice to take appropriate steps in the larger interest of the society.” (Emphasis supplied) 27. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to and rely upon the decision of this Court in the case of Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar, (Criminal Appeal No. 1277 of 2014, decided on 2nd July, 2014). In the said case, the petitioner, apprehending arrest in a case under Section 498A of the IPC and Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, prayed for anticipatory bail before this Court, having failed to obtain the same from the High Court. In that context, the observations made by this Court in paras 6, 7 and 8 respectively are worth taking note of.

--- JUDGMENT 444 ---
They are reproduced below: - “6. There is phenomenal increase in matrimonial disputes in recent years. The institution of marriage is greatly revered in this country. Section 498-A of the IPC was introduced with avowed object to combat the menace of harassment to a woman at the hands of her husband and his relatives. The fact that Section 498-A Page 23 of 36is a cognizable and non-bailable offence has lent it a dubious place of pride amongst the provisions that are used as weapons rather than shield by disgruntled wives. The simplest way to harass is to get the husband and his relatives arrested under this provision. In a quite number of cases, bed-ridden grand-fathers and grand-mothers of the husbands, their sisters living abroad for decades are arrested. Crime in India 2012 Statistics published by National Crime Records Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs shows arrest of 1,97,762 persons all over India during the year 2012 for offence under Section 498-A of the IPC, 9.4% more than the year 2011. Nearly a quarter of those arrested under this provision in 2012 were women i.e. 47,951 which depicts that mothers and sisters of the husbands were liberally included in their arrest net. Its share is 6% out of the total persons arrested under the crimes committed under Penal Code, 1860. It accounts for 4.5% of total crimes committed under different sections of penal code, more than any other crimes excepting theft and hurt. The rate of charge-sheeting in cases under Section 498A, IPC is as high as 93.6%, while the conviction rate is only 15%, which is lowest across all heads. As many as 3,72,706 cases are pending trial of which on current estimate, nearly 3,17,000 are likely to result in acquittal. 7. Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and cast scars forever. Law makers know it so also the police. There is a battle between the law makers and the police and it seems that police has not learnt its lesson; the lesson implicit and embodied in the Cr.PC. It has not come out of its colonial image despite six decades of independence, it is largely considered as a tool of harassment, oppression and surely not considered a friend of public. The need for caution in exercising the drastic power of arrest has been emphasized time and again by Courts but has not yielded desired result. Power to arrest greatly contributes to its arrogance so also the failure of the Magistracy to check it. Not only this, the power of arrest is one of the lucrative sources of police corruption. The attitude to arrest first and then proceed with the rest is despicable. It has become a Page 24 of 36handy tool to the police officers who lack sensitivity or act with oblique motive. 8. Law Commissions, Police Commissions and this Court in a large number of judgments emphasized the need to maintain a balance between individual liberty and societal order while exercising the power of arrest. Police officers make arrest as they believe that they possess the power to do so. As the arrest curtails freedom, brings humiliation and casts scars forever, we feel differently. We believe that no arrest should be made only because the offence is non-bailable and cognizable and therefore, lawful for the police officers to do so. The existence of the power to arrest is one thing, the justification for the exercise of it is quite another. Apart from power to arrest, the police officers must be able to justify the reasons thereof. No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a mere allegation of commission of an offence made against a person. It would be prudent and wise for a police officer that no arrest is made without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some investigation as to the genuineness of the allegation. Despite this legal position, the Legislature did not find any improvement. Numbers of arrest have not decreased. Ultimately, the Parliament had to intervene and on the recommendation of the 177th Report of the Law Commission submitted in the year 2001, Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short CrPC), in the present form came to be enacted. It is interesting to note that such a recommendation was made by the Law Commission in its 152nd and 154th Report submitted as back in the year 1994. …” (Emphasis Supplied) 28.

--- JUDGMENT 445 ---
L.H.V. Prasad reported in (2000) 3 SCC 693 wherein also in a matrimonial dispute, this Court had held that the High Court should have quashed the complaint arising out of a matrimonial dispute wherein all family members had been roped into the matrimonial litigation which was quashed and set aside. Their Lordships observed therein with which we entirely agree that: “there has been an outburst of matrimonial dispute in recent times. Marriage is a sacred ceremony, main purpose of which is to enable the young couple to settle down in life and live peacefully. But little matrimonial skirmishes suddenly erupt which often assume serious proportions resulting in heinous crimes in which elders of the family are also involved with the result that those who could have counselled and brought about rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being arrayed as accused in the criminal case. There are many reasons which need not be mentioned here for not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the parties may ponder over their defaults and terminate the disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a court of law where it takes years and years to conclude and in that process the parties lose their young days in chasing their cases in different courts.” Page 26 of 36The view taken by the judges in this matter was that the courts would not encourage such disputes. 21.

--- JUDGMENT 446 ---
Joshi v. State of Haryana it was observed that there is no doubt that the object of introducing Chapter XXA containing Section 498A in the Penal Code, 1860 was to prevent the torture to a woman by her husband or by relatives of her husband. Section 498A was added with a view to punish the husband and his relatives who harass or torture the wife to coerce her relatives to satisfy unlawful demands of dowry. But if the proceedings are initiated by the wife under Section 498A against the husband and his relatives and subsequently she has settled her disputes with her husband and his relatives and the wife and husband agreed for mutual divorce, refusal to exercise inherent powers by the High Court would not be proper as it would prevent woman from settling earlier. Thus for the purpose of securing the ends of justice quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 CrPC would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing. It would however be a different matter depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case whether to exercise or not to exercise such a power.” (Emphasis supplied) 29. The learned counsel appearing for the Respondent No. 2 as well as the learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that the High Court was justified in not embarking upon an enquiry as regards the truthfulness or reliability of the allegations in exercise of its inherent power under Section 482 of the CrPC as once there are allegations disclosing the commission of a cognizable offence then whether they are true or false should be left to the trial court to decide. Page 27 of 3630. In the aforesaid context, we should look into the category 7 as indicated by this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra). The category 7 as laid reads thus: - “(7) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge." 31. We are of the view that the category 7 referred to above should be taken into consideration and applied in a case like the one on hand a bit liberally. If the Court is convinced by the fact that the involvement by the complainant of her husband and his close relatives is with an oblique motive then even if the FIR and the chargesheet disclose the commission of a cognizable offence the Court with a view to doing substantial justice should read in between the lines the oblique motive of the complainant and take a pragmatic view of the matter. If the submission canvassed by the counsel appearing for the Respondent No. 2 and the State is to be accepted mechanically then in our opinion the very conferment of the inherent power by the CrPC upon the High Court would be rendered otiose. We are saying so for the simple reason that if the wife on account of matrimonial disputes decides to harass her husband and his family members then the first thing, she would ensure is to see that proper allegations are levelled in the First Information Report. Many times the services of professionals are availed for the same and once the complaint is drafted by a legal mind, it would be very difficult thereafter to weed out any loopholes or Page 28 of 36other deficiencies in the same. However, that does not mean that the Court should shut its eyes and raise its hands in helplessness, saying that whether true or false, there are allegations in the First Information Report and the chargesheet papers disclose the commission of a cognizable offence. If the allegations alone as levelled, more particularly in the case like the one on hand, are to be looked into or considered then why the investigating agency thought fit to file a closure report against the other co-accused? There is no answer to this at the end of the learned counsel appearing for the State. We say so, because allegations have been levelled not only against the Appellant herein but even against his parents, brother & sister. If that be so, then why the police did not deem fit to file chargesheet against the other co-accused? It appears that even the investigating agency was convinced that the FIR was nothing but an outburst arising from a matrimonial dispute. 32. Many times, the parents including the close relatives of the wife make a mountain out of a mole. Instead of salvaging the situation and making all possible endeavours to save the marriage, their action either due to ignorance or on account of sheer hatred towards the husband and his family members, brings about complete destruction of marriage on trivial issues. The first thing that comes in the mind of the wife, her parents and her relatives is the Police, as if the Police is the panacea of all evil. No sooner the matter reaches up to the Police, then even if there are fair chances of reconciliation between the spouses, they would get destroyed. The foundation of a sound marriage is tolerance, Page 29 of 36adjustment and respecting one another. Tolerance to each other's fault to a certain bearable extent has to be inherent in every marriage. Petty quibbles, trifling differences are mundane matters and should not be exaggerated and blown out of proportion to destroy what is said to have been made in the heaven. The Court must appreciate that all quarrels must be weighed from that point of view in determining what constitutes cruelty in each particular case, always keeping in view the physical and mental conditions of the parties, their character and social status. A very technical and hyper sensitive approach would prove to be disastrous for the very institution of the marriage. In matrimonial disputes the main sufferers are the children. The spouses fight with such venom in their heart that they do not think even for a second that if the marriage would come to an end, then what will be the effect on their children. Divorce plays a very dubious role so far as the upbringing of the children is concerned. The only reason why we are saying so is that instead of handling the whole issue delicately, the initiation of criminal proceedings would bring about nothing but hatred for each other. There may be cases of genuine ill-treatment and harassment by the husband and his family members towards the wife. The degree of such ill-treatment or harassment may vary. However, the Police machinery should be resorted to as a measure of last resort and that too in a very genuine case of cruelty and harassment. The Police machinery cannot be utilised for the purpose of holding the husband at ransom so that he could be squeezed by the wife at the instigation of her parents or relatives or friends. In Page 30 of 36all cases, where wife complains of harassment or ill-treatment, Section 498A of the IPC cannot be applied mechanically. No FIR is complete without Sections 506(2) and 323 of the IPC. Every matrimonial conduct, which may cause annoyance to the other, may not amount to cruelty. Mere trivial irritations, quarrels between spouses, which happen in day-to-day married life, may also not amount to cruelty. 33.

--- JUDGMENT 447 ---
Lord Denning, in Kaslefsky v. Kaslefsky, (1950) 2 All ER 398 observed as under: - “When the conduct consists of direct action by one against the other, it can then properly be said to be aimed at the other, even though there is no desire to injure the other or to inflict misery on him. Thus, it may consist of a display of temperament, emotion, or perversion whereby the one gives vent to his or her own feelings, not intending to injure the other, but making the other the object-the butt-at whose expense the emotion is relieved.” When there is no intent to injure, they are not to be regarded as cruelty unless they are plainly and distinctly proved to cause injury to health……..when the conduct does not consist of direct action against the other, but only of misconduct indirectly affecting him or her, such as drunkenness, gambling, or crime, then it can only properly be said to be aimed at the other when it is done, not only for the gratification of the selfish desires of the one who does it, but also in some part with an intention to injure the other or to inflict misery on him or her. Such an intention may readily be inferred from the fact that it is the natural consequence of his conduct, especially when the one spouse knows, or it has already been brought to his notice, what the consequences will be, and nevertheless he does it, careless and indifferent whether it distresses the other Page 31 of 36spouse or not The Court is, however not bound to draw the inference. The presumption that a person intends the natural consequences of his acts is one that may not must-be drawn. If in all the circumstances it is not the correct inference, then it should not be drawn. In cases of this kind, if there is no desire to injure or inflict misery on the other, the conduct only becomes cruelty when the justifiable remonstrances of the innocent party provoke resentment on the part of the other, which evinces itself in actions or words actually or physically directed at the innocent party.” 34. What constitutes cruelty in matrimonial matters has been well explained in American Jurisprudence 2nd edition Vol. 24 page 206. It reads thus: - “The question whether the misconduct complained of constitute cruelty and the like for divorce purposes is determined primarily by its effect upon the particular person complaining of the acts. The question is not whether the conduct would be cruel to a reasonable person or a person of average or normal sensibilities, but whether it would have that effect upon the aggrieved spouse. That which may be cruel to one person may be laughed off by another, and what may not be cruel to an individual under one set of circumstances may be extreme cruelty under another set of circumstances.” (Emphasis supplied) 35. In one of the recent pronouncements of this Court in Mahmood Ali & Ors.

--- JUDGMENT 448 ---
v. State of U.P & Ors., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 950, authored by one of us (J.B. Pardiwala, J.), the legal principle applicable apropos Section 482 of the CrPC was examined. Therein, it was observed that when an accused comes before the High Court, invoking either the inherent power under Section 482 CrPC or the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, to Page 32 of 36get the FIR or the criminal proceedings quashed, essentially on the ground that such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or vexatious or instituted with the ulterior motive of wreaking vengeance, then in such circumstances, the High Court owes a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more closely. It was further observed that it will not be enough for the Court to look into the averments made in the FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence are disclosed or not as, in frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the court owes a duty to look into many other attending circumstances emerging from the record of the case over and above the averments and, if need be, with due care and circumspection, to try and read between the lines. 36. For the foregoing reasons, we have reached to the conclusion that if the criminal proceedings are allowed to continue against the Appellant, the same will be nothing short of abuse of process of law & travesty of justice. This is a fit case wherein, the High Court should have exercised its inherent power under Section 482 of the CrPC for the purpose of quashing the criminal proceedings. 37. Before we close the matter, we would like to invite the attention of the Legislature to the observations made by this Court almost 14 years ago in Preeti Gupta (supra) as referred to in para 26 of this judgment. We once again reproduce paras 34 and 35 respectively as under: Page 33 of 36“34. Before parting with this case, we would like to observe that a serious relook of the entire provision is warranted by the legislation. It is also a matter of common knowledge that exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a large number of complaints. The tendency of over implication is also reflected in a very large number of cases. 35. The criminal trials lead to immense sufferings for all concerned. Even ultimate acquittal in the trial may also not be able to wipe out the deep scars of suffering of ignominy. Unfortunately a large number of these complaints have not only flooded the courts but also have led to enormous social unrest affecting peace, harmony and happiness of the society. It is high time that the legislature must take into consideration the pragmatic realities and make suitable changes in the existing law. It is imperative for the legislature to take into consideration the informed public opinion and the pragmatic realities in consideration and make necessary changes in the relevant provisions of law. We direct the Registry to send a copy of this judgment to the Law Commission and to the Union Law Secretary, Government of India who may place it before the Hon'ble Minister for Law and Justice to take appropriate steps in the larger interest of the society.” 38. In the aforesaid context, we looked into Sections 85 and 86 respectively of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, which is to come into force with effect from 1st July, 2024 so as to ascertain whether the Legislature has seriously looked into the suggestions of this Court as made in Preeti Gupta (supra). Sections 85 and 86 respectively are reproduced herein below: “Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty. Page 34 of 3685. Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Cruelty defined. 86. For the purposes of section 85, “cruelty” means— (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or (b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.” 39. The aforesaid is nothing but verbatim reproduction of Section 498A of the IPC. The only difference is that the Explanation to Section 498A of the IPC, is now by way of a separate provision, i.e., Section 86 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 40. We request the Legislature to look into the issue as highlighted above taking into consideration the pragmatic realities and consider making necessary changes in Sections 85 and 86 respectively of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, before both the new provisions come into force. 41.

--- JUDGMENT 449 ---
1 CORRECTED 2024 INSC 773 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8315 – 8316 OF 2014 RENJITH K.G. & OTHERS ...APPELLANT(S) VERSUS SHEEBA ...RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T R.MAHADEVAN, J. Heard Mr. Rajeev Mishra and Mr. Sanand Ramakrishnan, learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. Jayant Muth Raj, learned senior counsel and Mr. Nishe Rajen Shonker, learned counsel for the Respondent. 2. These Civil Appeals are preferred against the judgment and order dated 11.11.2011 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam1 in E.F.A Nos.6 and 7 of 1998, whereby, the High Court allowed the said appeals and remanded the matter to the trial Court for fresh consideration. 3. Succinctly stated facts are that the appellants are the legal representatives of the original plaintiff / decree holder viz., Padmakshy (deceased), who had filed a suit in O.S.No.38 of 1956 before the Sub Court, Parur, for partition and separate possession of her share in the plaint schedule 13 items of immovable properties. 1 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court”2 The Sub Court, Parur, passed a preliminary decree on 23.10.1958. Subsequently, the said suit was transferred to the file of the Additional District Court, Parur and re-numbered as O.S.No.82 of 1960, in which, a final decree was passed on 09.03.1970. 4. The dispute revolved around is qua item no.4 of the plaint schedule property measuring an extent of 1 acre 57 cents in Sy.No.120/10 situated at Muppathepadam Kara, Kodungallur Village, Paravur Taluk, Kerala, which originally belonged to one Ayyapan, who had eight children. In the year 1085 M.E.2 the said Ayyappan executed a mortgage in favour of one Kunjan and created a further mortgage in favour of the same mortgagee in the year 1093 M.E.3 On the death of Ayyappan, his six children assigned their 6/8 shares in favour of one Raghuthaman, by gift deed No. 2147 dated 17.07.1963 and the remaining 2/8 shares were obtained by the Defendant No.1, by name, Padmanabhan, as per the deed No.1491 of 1119 M.E.4 On the death of the mortgagee Kunjan, his rights devolved on the Defendant No.1 and the original plaintiff Padmakshy (who was a minor at that time). The Defendant No.1, without the concurrence of Padmakshy, executed a mortgage for Rs.1,000/- in favour of one Nanu, in the year 1123 M.E.5 and the said Nanu, in turn, assigned his right to the Defendant 2 Malayalam Era or the Malayalam Calendar. To get the corresponding year on the Gregorian Calendar, add 826 which makes it 1911. 3 Gregorian Calendar year 1919 4 Gregorian Calendar year 1945 5 Gregorian Calendar year 19493 No.10, by name, Veeran, as per deed No.101 of 1951. As per document No.3669 of 1964, the Defendant No.10 assigned his right to the said Raghuthaman.

--- JUDGMENT 450 ---
5. In the final decree proceedings, qua item no.4, based on the Advocate Commissioner’s report, the plaintiff was allotted one half portion of the property in Sy.No.120/10 i.e., red shaded portion in Ex.C2 plan; and the Defendant No.10 was directed to pay a sum of Rs.461.67 towards equalisation and also mesne profit at the rate of Rs.64.80 per year to the plaintiff. The final decree was engrossed on the requisite stamp paper on 19.11.1990. To execute the same, the plaintiff preferred an Execution Petition bearing No.4 of 1991, in which, notice was ordered to the defendants / judgment debtors, but, they did not turn up. Ultimately, the Executing Court ordered delivery of possession and accordingly, a portion of item no.4 plaint schedule property, as shown in Ex.C2 plan, was delivered to the plaintiff on 22.11.1994. 6. Thereafter, the aforesaid Raghuthaman preferred E.A.No.1 of 1995 in E.P. No.4 of 1991under Order XXI Rule 99 of the Civil Procedure Code6 for re- delivery of the property mentioned in Ex.C2 plan, claiming independent right, title and interest in the same. Along with this application, he also filed E.A.No.2 of 1995 seeking an order of injunction restraining the plaintiff from committing waste till the disposal of EA No.1 of 1995; and E.A.No.3 of 1995 for recovery of damages to the tune of Rs.25,000/- from the plaintiff for having committed waste 6 For short, “CPC”4 in the property. All the three applications were jointly heard and were dismissed, by a common order dated 12.08.1997. 7. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order passed in E.A. Nos.1 and 3 of 1995, the said Raghuthaman filed Execution First Appeals viz., EFA Nos.6 of 1998 and 7 of 1998, which came to be dismissed by the High Court, by judgment dated 30.05.2007. Seeking to review the said judgment, the respondents herein, who are the legal representatives of the said Raghuthaman, filed R.P.Nos.1107 and 934 of 2007, which came to be allowed, by order dated 22.03.2010. Pursuant to the same, E.F.A Nos.6 and 7 of 1998 were re-heard and were eventually, allowed by the High Court, by the judgment dated 11.11.2011 which is impugned herein. 8. The first and foremost contention of the learned counsel appearing for the appellants is that the predecessor of the respondents (Raghuthaman) did not establish his independent right, title or interest in the property in question and he was only a pendente lite transferee and therefore, he cannot resist the execution of a decree filed by the original plaintiff / decree holder. Additionally, the learned counsel submitted that the decision in Chiranji Lal (D) by LRs. v. Hari Das (D) by LRs.7 relied on by the High Court is not applicable to the facts of the present case. 9. The learned counsel appearing for the contesting respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the final decree was passed on 09.03.1970; it was engrossed 7(2005) 10 SCC 7465 on the stamp paper on 19.11.1990; the execution petition seeking delivery of possession of the property under the decree was preferred only on 13.03.1991, which was clearly barred by limitation as per Article 136 of the Limitation Act. That apart, the predecessor of the respondents under Order XXI Rule 99 CPC is entitled to raise the question of limitation for the execution of the decree, which has become time-barred. Accordingly, the High Court set aside the order dated 12.08.1997 passed in EA Nos.1 and 3 of 1995 and remanded the matter to the trial Court for fresh consideration, by the judgment impugned herein, which does not call for any interference at the hands of this Court. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 451 ---
The facts narrated above are not disputed. Concededly, in the suit filed by the original plaintiff, preliminary decree was passed on 23.10.1958; final decree was passed on 09.03.1970 and it was engrossed on stamp paper on 19.11.1990; and the Execution Petition seeking delivery of possession of the suit properties, came to be filed only on 13.03.1991. It is also to be noted that in the final decree, there was no order directing the parties to furnish stamp papers for the purpose of engrossing the decree. 12. Seemingly, the predecessor of the respondents claimed right, title and interest qua 78.5 cents forming part of item no.4 of the plaint schedule property, by virtue of the assignment deed dated 01.12.1964 bearing No.3669 executed by6 the Defendant No.10. Pursuant to the order of the Executing Court, he was dispossessed from the subject property, in which, he was occupying and the possession was handed over to the plaintiff / decree holder. After repeated challenge, the applications preferred by the predecessor of the respondents seeking re-delivery of possession and damages, contending inter alia that the Execution Petition was barred by limitation, came to be allowed and the matter was remanded to the trial Court for fresh consideration, by the judgment impugned herein. 13. It was the specific plea of the appellants that the predecessor of the respondents being a pendente lite transferee, is not entitled to file an application under Order XXI Rule 99 CPC and raise the question of limitation of the Execution Petition, so as to deprive the right of the appellants to enjoy the fruits of the decree. 14. On a reading of Order XXI Rule 99 CPC, it is lucid that where any person other than the judgment debtor is dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of a decree for the possession of such property, or where such property has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he may make an application to the Court complaining of such dispossession. It also means that a third party to the decree has a right to approach the Court even after dispossession of the immovable property, which he was occupying. In the case on hand, the predecessor of the respondents was not a party to the suit and he was dispossessed7 from the property, in execution of the decree passed in the suit and therefore, he who is purported to be a stranger to the decree, can very well adjudicate his claim of independent right, title and interest in the decretal property as per Order XXI Rule 99 CPC. 15. In so far as the claim of appellants that the predecessor of the respondents, namely Mr.Raghuthaman, being pendent lite transferee and hence would have no locus to file the application seeking re-delivery, we have already held that “any person” not a party to the suit or in other words a stranger to the suit can seek re- delivery, after he has been dispossessed. The term “Stranger” would cover within its ambit, a pendent lite transferee, who has not been impleaded. That apart, the facts in the present case disclose that the property stood transferred to the predecessor of the respondents before the Final Decree was passed in 1970. The fact that Mr.Raghuthaman had successfully resisted the claim of the 9th Defendant for delivery of possession, in the presence of the predecessor of the appellant is not disputed. While so, it was incumbent on the appellants to have impleaded the predecessor of the respondents by filing an application under Order 21 Rule 97 of CPC, when they resisted the delivery. The pendent lite purchaser has every right to defend his right, title, interest and possession. This Court recently while adjudicating the right of a pendent lite transferee held as under: Yogesh Goyanka v. Govind, (2024) 7 SCC 524 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1692 “16. The fulcrum of the dispute herein concerns the impleadment of a transferee pendente lite who undisputedly had notice of the pending8 litigation. At the outset, it appears pertinent to reiterate the settled position that the doctrine of lis pendens as provided under Section 52 of the Act does not render all transfers pendente lite to be void ab initio, it merely renders rights arising from such transfers as subservient to the rights of the parties to the pending litigation and subject to any direction that the Court may pass thereunder. “17. Therefore, the mere fact that RSD was executed during the pendency of the underlying suit does not automatically render it null and void. On this ground alone, we find the impugned order to be wholly erroneous as it employs Section 52 of the Act to nullify RSD and on that basis, concludes that the impleadment application is untenable. Contrary to this approach of the High Court, the law on impleadment of subsequent transferees, as established by this Court has evolved in a manner that liberally enables subsequent transferees to protect their interests in recognition of the possibility that the transferor pendente lite may not defend the title or may collude with the plaintiff therein (see the decision of this Court in Amit Kumar Shaw v. Farida Khatoon [Amit Kumar Shaw v.

--- JUDGMENT 452 ---
Subramaniyam, (2012) 7 SCC 738 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 324] ).” 16. The difference between the rights of a decree holder qua a third party to the suit and the right of a third party after being dispossessed has been laid down by this Court in Sriram Housing Finance & Investment (India) Ltd. v. Omesh Mishra Memorial Charitable Trust, (2022) 15 SCC 176 : 2022 SCC OnLine SC 794, wherein it was held as follows: “24. On conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions, it can be observed that under Rule 97, it is only the “decree-holder” who is entitled to make an application in case where he is offered resistance or obstruction by “any person”. In the present case, as admitted by the appellant itself, it is a bona fide purchaser of the property and not the “decree-holder”. As available from the material placed on record, it is the respondent Trust along with legal heirs of late N.D. Mishra who are the decree-holders and not the appellant. Therefore, it is obvious that the appellant cannot take shelter of Rule 97 as stated above to raise objections against execution of decree passed in favour of the respondent. Further, Rule 99 pertains to making a complaint to the Court against “dispossession” of the9 immovable property by the person in “possession” of the property by the holder of a decree or purchaser thereof. “25. It is factually not in dispute that the appellant purchased the said property from Mr Yogesh Mishra vide sale deed dated 12-4-2004 and has been in vacant and physical possession of the property since then. Had it been the case that the appellant was dispossessed by the respondent Trust in execution of decree dated 2-9-2003, the appellant would have been well within the ambit of Rule 99 to make an application seeking appropriate relief to be put back in possession. On the contrary, the appellant in the instant case was never dispossessed from the property in question and till date, as contended and unrefuted, the possession of same rests with the appellant. Considering the aforesaid, the appellant cannot be said to be entitled to make an application under Rule 99 raising objections in execution proceedings since he has never been dispossessed as required under Rule 99. 26. Now, as stated above, applications under Rule 97 and Rule 99 are subject to Rule 101 which provides for determination of questions relating to disputes as to right, title or interest in the property arising between the parties to the proceedings or their representatives on an application made under Rule 97 or Rule 99. Effectively, the said Rule does away with the requirement of filing of fresh suit for adjudication of disputes as mentioned above. Now, in the present case, Order 21 Rule 101 has no applicability as the appellant is neither entitled to make an application under Rule 97 nor Rule 99 for the reasons stated above. Accordingly, we find no substance in the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.” Therefore, once an application under Order 21 Rule 99 is filed, it is incumbent upon the Trial Court to consider all the rival claims including the right title and interest of the parties under Order 21 Rule 101 which bars a separate suit by mandating the execution court to decide the dispute. 17. As regards the question of limitation for execution of a decree passed in the suit for partition, this Court, in the decision in Chiranji Lal (supra), has categorically held that the time begins to run from the date of final decree and not10 from the date on which it is engrossed on the stamp paper. For better appreciation, the relevant passage of the said decision is reproduced below: “24. A decree in a suit for partition declares the rights of the parties in the immovable properties and divides the shares by metes and bounds. Since a decree in a suit for partition creates rights and liabilities of the parties with respect to the immovable properties, it is considered as an instrument liable for the payment of stamp duty under the Indian Stamp Act. The object of the Stamp Act being securing the revenue for the State, the scheme of the Stamp Act provides that a decree of partition not duly stamped can be impounded and once the requisite stamp duty along with penalty, if any, is paid the decree can be acted upon. 25. The engrossment of the final decree in a suit for partition would relate back to the date of the decree. The beginning of the period of limitation for executing such a decree cannot be made to depend upon date of the engrossment of such a decree on the stamp paper. The date of furnishing of stamp paper is an uncertain act, within the domain, purview and control of a party. No date or period is fixed for furnishing stamp papers. No rule has been shown to us requiring the court to call upon or give any time for furnishing of stamp paper. A party by his own act of not furnishing stamp paper cannot stop the running of period of limitation. None can take advantage of his own wrong. The proposition that period of limitation would remain suspended till stamp paper is furnished and decree engrossed thereupon and only thereafter the period of twelve years will begin to run would lead to absurdity. In Yeswant Deorao Deshmukh v. Walchand Ramchand Kothari [1950 SCR 852] it was said that the payment of court fee on the amount found due was entirely in the power of the decree holder and there was nothing to prevent him from paying it then and there; it was a decree capable of execution from the very date it was passed. 26. Rules of limitation are meant to see that parties do not resort to dilatory tactics, but seek their remedy promptly. As above noted, there is no statutory provision prescribing a time limit for furnishing of the stamp paper for engrossing the decree or time limit for engrossment of the decree on stamp paper and there is no statutory obligation on the Court passing the decree to direct the parties to furnish the stamp paper for engrossing the decree. In the present case the Court has not passed an order directing the parties to furnish the stamp papers for the purpose of engrossing the decree. Merely because there is no direction by the Court to furnish the stamp papers for engrossing of the decree or there is no time limit fixed by law, does not mean that the party can furnish stamp papers at its sweet will and claim that the period of limitation provided under Article 136 of the Act would start only thereafter as and when the decree is engrossed thereupon. The starting of period of limitation for execution of a partition decree cannot be made contingent upon the engrossment of the decree on11 the stamp paper. The engrossment of the decree on stamp paper would relate back to the date of the decree, namely, 7th August, 1981, in the present case. In this view the execution application filed on 21st March, 1994 was time barred having been filed beyond the period of twelve years prescribed under Article 136 of the Act. The High Court committed illegality in coming to the conclusion that it was not barred by limitation.” 18. The above judgment was relied upon by the Constitutional Bench of this Court while deciding the validity of an unstamped agreement, wherein it was observed as under: Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under A&C Act, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899, In re, (2024) 6 SCC 1 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1666 “255. In Chiranji Lal v.

--- JUDGMENT 453 ---
Hari Das [Chiranji Lal v. Hari Das, (2005) 10 SCC 746] , a three-Judge Bench of this Court rejected the contention that an unstamped preliminary decree is not enforceable and, therefore, the period of limitation begins to run when the decree is engrossed on the stamp paper. The Stamp Act is a fiscal measure with the object to secure revenue for the State on certain classes of instruments. The Stamp Act is not enacted to arm the litigant with a weapon of technicality to meet the case of his opponent. As there is no rule which prescribes any time for furnishing of stamp paper or to call upon a person to pay stamp duty on a preliminary decree of partition, the proposition that period of limitation would remain suspended till stamp paper is furnished and decree engrossed thereon was rejected.” 19. Applying the ratio laid down in Chiranjilal case (Supra) to the facts of the present case, the High Court rightly set aside the order passed in the Execution Petition and remanded the matter to the trial court for fresh consideration, leaving all the issues including the independent right, title or interest claimed by the respondents in the property in question, to be adjudicated therein. Therefore, we do not find any infirmity or illegality in the judgment so rendered by the High Court, warranting our interference.12 20. In view thereof, these Civil Appeals stand dismissed. However, it is open to the appellants to raise all the contentions available to them before the trial Court. Costs made easy.

--- JUDGMENT 454 ---
2. The appellant approached the High Court of Delhi through a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India read with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for quashing of the ‘History Sheet’ opened against him and the proposal to declare him as ‘Bad Character’ with the entry of his name in the Surveillance ‘Register-X, Part II, Bundle A’ at Police Station Jamia Nagar, District: South-East, Delhi. The Single Judge of High Court has, vide the impugned judgment dated 19.01.2023, dismissed the appellant’s writ petition, giving rise to these proceedings. Page 1 of 83. Upon notice, the Delhi Police entered appearance through Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel, who was apprised of some disturbing contents of the History Sheet to the extent it pertained to the school going minor children of the appellant and his wife, against whom there was apparently no adverse material whatsoever for inclusion in the History Sheet. It was then apprised that the format of the history sheeters was prescribed following Rule 23.8 and Rule 23.9 of the Punjab Police Rules 1934 (in short, the “1934 Rules”) as were applicable in the NCT of Delhi. Mr. Jain, learned senior counsel for the respondents, however, fairly agreed to re-visit the archaic rules with a view to ensure that the dignity, self-respect and privacy of the innocent people, who incidentally happen to be the family members of a suspect, is not compromised at any cost. 4.

--- JUDGMENT 455 ---
Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel has today placed on record the amended Standing Order No.L&O/54/2022 issued by the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. The aforesaid Standing Order pertains to ‘Surveillance of History Sheeters and Bad Characters’. It appears that the Original Standing order was issued on 10.06.2022 and paragraph 9(2) thereof titled as “Preparation of History Sheet” was replicated from provisions of the 1934 Rules. Page 2 of 85. With the amended Standing Order issued on 21.03.2024, the Commissioner of Police has provided as follows: “The space for “relation and connection” should be filled in with a view to afford clues about those persons with whom the criminal is likely to harbour when wanted by the police, including relations or friends living at a distance from his home, and his associates in crime, abettors and receivers. It may be noted that the space for “relations and connections” in the history sheet should reflect identities of those persons who can afforded him shelter when the offender is running/wanted by the police (in general) and should include his associates in crime, abettors and receivers (in particular) and no details of any minor relatives i.e. son, daughter, siblings should be recorded anywhere in the History Sheet unless there is evidence that the minor under question can, or has earlier had, afforded shelter to the offender, “while he was on run from police”. While preparing History Sheet, it may also be kept in mind that as per Section 74 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, there is a prohibition on disclosing the Identity of a child in conflict with law or a child in need of care and protection of a child victim or witness of a crime through a report etc. Even though the History Sheet is an internal Police document and not a publicly accessible report, care must be taken that identities of only those minor relatives are entered into the History Sheet against whom evidence exists that minor in question has earlier had, afforded shelter to the offender, while he was on run from police”. In addition to above, the particular nature of each person’s connection should be noted against each, and, when persons shown as connections themselves have history sheets, a cross reference with those History Sheets should be given. Maximum phone numbers/mobile numbers or associates/relatives/acquaintances of BCs should be collected and placed for record. Aadhar Number, EPIC number, e-mail ID, social media accounts/profiles viz, facebook, Instagram ID, Twitter ID etc. to be placed on file. Further mobile numbers & other available details of associates/relatives/acquaintance of BC should be collected and placed on record.” Page 3 of 86. We find from the amended Standing Order that in the column “relations and connections”, it has been decided that identities of only those persons shall be reflected who can afford the history sheeter/bad character shelter, when the offender is running/wanted by the police and it shall also include names of his associates in crime, abettors and receivers. The amended Standing Order emphatically says that no details of any minor relatives, i.e., son, daughter, siblings shall be recorded anywhere in the History Sheet unless there is evidence that such minor, has or earlier had, afforded shelter to the offender. 7. Secondly, the amended provision now mandates that Section 74 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall be meticulously followed, whereunder there is a prohibition on disclosing the identity of a child in conflict with law or a child in need of care and protection or a child victim or a witness of a crime through a report etc. 8. The amended Standing Order further clarifies that ‘History Sheet’ is an internal police document and not a publicly accessible report. It has cautioned the police officers that care must be taken to ensure that identities of only those minor relatives are entered in the History Sheet against whom evidence exists that such minor had earlier afforded shelter to the offender, while he was on the run from the police. The safeguard with regard to the details of Page 4 of 8phone numbers, Aadhar Card, EPIC number, e-mail I.D., social media accounts etc., have also been suggested in the amended Standing Order. 9. It seems that so far as the case in hand is concerned, the decision taken by the respondents to the effect that the History Sheet is only an internal police document and it shall not be brought in public domain, largely addresses the concern expressed by us in the beginning. Secondly, the extra care and precaution, to be now observed by a police officer while ensuring that the identity of a minor child is not disclosed as per the law too, is a necessary step to redress the appellant’s grievances. It will surely prevent the undesirable exposure that has been given to the minor children in this case. 10. All that we propose to direct the police authorities is that the amended Standing Order dated 21.03.2024 be given effect forthwith in the appellant’s case also. 11. In addition, we also direct the Commissioner of Police, Delhi to designate a senior police officer, in the rank of Joint Commissioner of Police or above, who shall periodically audit/review the contents of the History Sheets and will ensure confidentiality and a leeway to delete the names of such persons/juvenile/children who are, in the course of investigation, Page 5 of 8found innocent and are entitled to be expunged from the category of “relations and connections” in a History Sheet. 12. It goes without saying that if a Police Officer of Delhi Police is found to have acted contrary to the amended Standing Order and or the directions given herein above, prompt action against such delinquent officer shall be taken. 13. The impugned judgment of the High Court dated 19.01.2023 stands modified and the instant criminal appeal is disposed of in the above terms. 14. Having partially addressed the grievance of the appellant, we now, in exercise of our suo motu powers, propose to expand the scope of these proceedings so that the police authorities in other States and Union Territories may also consider the desirability of ensuring that no mechanical entries in History Sheet are made of innocent individuals, simply because they happen to hail from the socially, economically and educationally disadvantaged backgrounds, along with those belonging to Backward Communities, Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes. While we are not sure about the degree of their authenticity, but there are some studies available in the public domain that reveal a pattern of an unfair, prejudicial and atrocious mindset. It is alleged that the Police Diaries are maintained selectively of individuals belonging Page 6 of 8to Vimukta Jatis, based solely on caste-bias, a somewhat similar manner as happened in colonial times. All the State Governments are therefore expected to take necessary preventive measures to safeguard such communities from being subjected to inexcusable targeting or prejudicial treatment. We must bear in mind that these pre-conceived notions often render them ‘invisible victims’ due to prevailing stereotypes associated with their communities, which may often impede their right to live a life with self-respect. 15. The value for human dignity and life is deeply embedded in Article 21 of our Constitution. The expression ‘life’ unequivocally includes the right to live a life worthy of human honour and all that goes along with it. Self-regard, social image and an honest space for oneself in one’s surrounding society, are just as significant to a dignified life as are adequate food, clothing and shelter. 16. It seems that a periodic audit mechanism overseen by a senior police officer, as directed for the NCT of Delhi, will serve as a critical tool to review and scrutinize the entries made, so as to ascertain that these are devoid of any biases or discriminatory practices. Through the effective implementation of audits, we can secure the elimination of such deprecated practices and kindle the legitimate hope that the right to live with human dignity, as guaranteed under Article 21, is well protected. Page 7 of 817. We are conscious of the fact that States or Union Territories, other than the NCT of Delhi, are not before us. They have not been heard. No positive mandamus can thus be issued to them. Further, we are not aware of the existing Rules/Policies or Standing Orders in vogue in different States/Union Territories. We, therefore, deem it appropriate, at this stage, to direct all the States/Union Territories to revisit their policy-regime and consider whether suitable amendments on the pattern of the ‘Delhi Model’ are required to be made so that our observations made in paragraphs 14 to 16 of this order can be given effect in true letter and spirit. 18. The Registry is, accordingly, directed to forward a copy of this judgement to the Chief Secretary and Director General of Police of all States and Union Territories to enable them to consider and comply with what has been held above, as early as possible but not later than six months. 19.

--- JUDGMENT 456 ---
REPORTABLE 2024 INSC 385 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 55 OF 2015 SUKHPAL SINGH ….APPELLANT(S) VERSUS NCT OF DELHI ….RESPONDENT(S) J U D G M E N T Mehta, J. 1. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 7th January, 2010 passed by the High Court of Delhi in Criminal Appeal No. 296 of 2003 whereby the appeal filed by the appellant against the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 6th March, 2003 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial Court’) was rejected. 2. By the said judgment, the trial Court convicted the accused appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘IPC’) 1and sentenced him to life imprisonment and fine of Rs.2000/-(in default further rigorous imprisonment for six months). 3. Leave was granted by this Court in this matter on 8th January, 2015 and the accused appellant was released on bail on furnishing bail bonds to the satisfaction of the trial Court. Brief facts:- 4. The accused appellant was married to Usha and three children were born out of the wedlock. However, the spouses got embroiled in a matrimonial strife and thus the appellant left company of his wife Usha and started residing at his village Khatta, U.P. 5. The officers of Police Station Bhajan Pura received a wireless message on 20th May, 1990 from the PCR regarding an incident which had taken place outside the shops of Rori and Badarpur. Acting on the said information, Head Constable Mohan Lal, Constables Jai Pal, Bhagwan Dass and Ramesh Chand along with Inspector Ishwar Singh reached House no.

--- JUDGMENT 457 ---
J-387, Gali No. 14, Kartar Nagar, Delhi where Usha w/o Sukhpal(the appellant herein) was found lying dead on a cot in a room of the said house. On cursory inspection, abrasions, scratches and other injury marks 2associated with bleeding were noticed on the neck, mouth, shoulder and private parts of the deceased Usha. Marks of dragging were also found on the right leg below the knee. Strips of tablets were found scattered around the cot on which the dead body was lying. The police officials claim to have recovered a handwritten note(Exhibit PW-12/E) from the crime scene bearing a recital indicating that the scribe was the killer of Usha. The prosecution alleges that the said note was written by the accused appellant. 6. Statement(Exhibit PW-1/A) of Ashok Kumar Pathak, resident of House No. J-386, Gali No. 14, Kartar Nagar, Delhi was recorded by the police officials on 20th May, 1990 wherein he stated that he was residing in the immediate vicinity of House No. J-387, Gali No. 14, Kartar Nagar, Delhi, where Usha with her husband Sukhpal(accused appellant) and three children had been residing for the last 3-4 years. Ashok Kumar Pathak was serving with M/s.

--- JUDGMENT 458 ---
R.P. Associates and that he had got Sukhpal employed in that very firm. Sukhpal suspected his wife Usha of infidelity which often led to quarrels between them and, therefore, Sukhpal left his wife and children and started residing in village Khatta, U.P. He used to commute from the village for attending to his job. Sometimes, he 3would also come and stay with Usha. Four days prior to the alleged occurrence, Sukhpal had visited Usha and on that day, Usha’s sister(Sudha) had also come there. Sukhpal quarrelled with Usha and went away. On the next day, Usha’s sister, Sudha(PW-10) took the three children of Usha and went to her house. On the day prior to incident, i.e., on 19th May, 1990, in the evening when Ashok Kumar Pathak had returned from duty and got free after having his meals, at about 9.30 p.m., he saw that Sukhpal had come to visit Usha on his cycle. The spouses were talking while sitting on a cot in the courtyard. He went to the terrace for sleeping and after some time, it started raining so he came downstairs and saw that Sukhpal and Usha had also gone inside their room. The next morning i.e. 20th May, 1990, while he was carrying out his daily chores, he saw Sukhpal’s cycle parked in the courtyard and presumed that he and Usha were inside the house. He did not see any movement in the house for the entire day and even at about 5.30 p.m., he saw the cycle of Sukhpal parked at the same place but neither Sukhpal nor Usha were to be seen. So, he called out from outside, but nobody responded, on which he went into the room and found Usha lying dead on a cot. Sukhpal was not present there. He informed the neighbours who, in turn, called the police. 4He bore a suspicion that Sukhpal(appellant herein) might have killed Usha sometime during the night and had fled away. This statement was taken as a complaint and based thereupon, FIR No. 213 of 1990(Exhibit PW-13/F) came to be registered at P.S. Bhajanpura for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.

--- JUDGMENT 459 ---
7. The dead body of Usha was subjected to autopsy and the post mortem report(Exhibit PW-15/A) was received with a pertinent opinion that cause of death was “Asphyxia resulting from manual strangulation”. A confession letter/note(Exhibit PW-12/E) was found below the cot where the dead body was lying and it was seized vide memorandum(Exhibit PW-13/B) and spot inspection memo(Exhibit PW-12/B) was prepared. 8. The Investigating Officer(PW-13) collected two letters(Exhibit PW-12/C and PW-12/D) purportedly written by the accused appellant from the employer namely Sanjiv Jain(PW-8). Specimen Pad(Exhibit PW-13/O) of the employer was also collected and seized vide memorandum(Exhibit P-13/N). 9. The prosecution alleges that the accused appellant fled away from the crime scene. Efforts were made to trace him out without any success and thus proceedings under Section 82 and Section 83 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being 5referred to as ‘CrPC’) were initiated against him. The accused appellant was declared to be a proclaimed offender and a charge sheet came to be filed against him under Section 299 CrPC by showing him to be an absconder. As per the prosecution case, the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak, Head Constables Mohan Lal and Surender Kumar and Inspector Bal Kishan were examined on oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC and the file was consigned to the record room. 10.

--- JUDGMENT 460 ---
The accused appellant could be apprehended on 9th August, 2000 i.e. nearly after ten years of the incident. He gave a disclosure statement pointing out the place of incident. His specimen handwritings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) were obtained while he was in police custody. Thereafter, the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E), the specimen handwritings(Exhibits PW-5/D, PW-5/E and PW-5/F) along with admitted handwritings(Exhibits PW-12/C and PW-12/D)(collected from the employer of accused appellant) were sent to FSL for comparison. The handwriting expert(PW-24) issued a report(Exhibit PW-12/F) opining that the confession letter/note(recovered from the crime scene) was in the handwriting of the accused appellant. 611. A supplementary charge sheet came to be filed against the accused appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. The trial Court framed charge against the accused appellant for the said offence. He pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 24 witnesses and exhibited 48 documents to support its case. 12. It is relevant to mention here that the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak, was not produced for deposition in the trial which resumed after the arrest of the accused appellant. The trial Court held that the non-examination of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was not a deliberate act of the prosecution and rather the same was beyond the control of prosecution. The trial Court further found that complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was examined on oath on 17th July, 1991 in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. In this sworn statement, Ashok Kumar Pathak proved his signature on the statement[Exhibit PW-1/A(which led to registration of FIR)] made by him to the police on 20th May, 1990 and gave a detailed account of the sequence of events witnessed by him. The complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak could not be examined in the trial proceedings post arrest of the accused as he 7could not be found at the address given in the FIR despite all sincere efforts. 13. The trial Court held that since Ashok Kumar Pathak could not be located despite genuine efforts, his sworn deposition recorded in absence of the accused appellant was liable to be read in evidence as per the provisions of Section 299 CrPC. Accordingly, the said statement was relied upon as a piece of incriminating evidence against the accused appellant.

--- JUDGMENT 461 ---
14. The trial Court also placed reliance on the confession note/letter(Exhibit PW-12/E) holding that the same was found to be in the handwriting of the accused appellant by the handwriting expert(PW-24) vide report(Exhibit PW-12/F). The said confession was treated to be an admission and a strong link of incriminating circumstantial evidence against the appellant. 15. Placing reliance upon the evidence of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC and the evidence of the handwriting expert(PW-24), the trial Court held the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) to be an unimpeachable piece of evidence sealing the fate of the accused. Corroboration thereto was sought from the evidence of Sudha(PW-10), sister of the deceased Usha. By relying on these incriminating links of 8circumstantial evidence, the trial Court proceeded to convict and sentenced the accused appellant as above vide judgment dated 6th March, 2003. 16. The appeal preferred by the accused appellant in the High Court of Delhi was rejected by learned Division Bench of High Court vide judgment dated 7th January, 2010 holding that the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) written by the accused appellant proved his culpability in the crime. The prosecution had established that the accused appellant was in company of the deceased Usha at her house where she was murdered in the intervening night of 19th and 20th May, 1990. The prosecution also established that the deceased was done to death by violence in the said intervening night and that the accused appellant had absconded to flee from justice which established his guilty conduct. 17. The accused appellant has challenged the above judgment affirming his conviction and sentence through this appeal by special leave. Submissions on behalf of the appellant: - 18. Learned legal aid counsel appointed by Supreme Court Legal Services Committee(SCLSC) for representing the appellant 9advanced extensive submissions to assail the impugned judgment. He urged that:- (i) The trial Court as well as the High Court committed grave factual error in holding that complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was examined on oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. As per learned counsel, this finding is totally contrary to the record because the statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak relied upon by the trial Court and the High Court is actually the statement of the said witness recorded by the SHO, PS Bhajan Pura under Section 161 CrPC which was proved by the Investigating Officer(PW- 13) in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. (ii) The confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) is a fabricated piece of evidence because the prosecution did not make any endeavour to get the two admitted documents(Exhibit PW-12/C and PW-12/D) collected from the employer of the accused appellant, i.e., Sanjiv Jain(PW-8) compared with the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E). This contention was made without prejudice to the plea that the very process of collecting these 10documents is under a cloud of doubt because the Investigating Officer(PW-13) could not have had any idea that the accused had worked in M/s. R.P.

--- JUDGMENT 462 ---
Associates. (iii) The handwriting expert’s report(Exhibit PW-12/F) and the testimony of the handwriting expert(PW-24) is not reliable, since the expert did not give any opinion after comparing the admitted writings(Exhibit PW-12/C and PW-12/D)(seized from the employer of the accused appellant) with the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E). (iv) Without prejudice to the above, learned counsel submitted that from a visual comparison of the confession note(PW-12/E) and the specimen handwritings of the accused(Exhibit PW-5/D, PW-5/E and PW-5/F), it would become clear that there is no similarity whatsoever in the two sets of handwritings so as to conclude with any degree of certainty that the scribe of these documents was one and the same. He thus urged that the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) of the handwriting expert(PW-24) is unreliable and cannot be pressed into service for affirming the guilt of the accused. 11(v) He urged that the evidence of Sudha(PW-10) is totally unreliable and not trustworthy and deserves to be discarded. It was admitted by the prosecution that the accused appellant and Usha had divorced each other and thus it is totally unbelievable that the accused appellant had come and stayed with Usha, few days before the incident as claimed by Sudha (PW-10). He urged that the evidence of Sudha(PW-10) is not trustworthy and deserves to be discarded. (vi) The claim of the prosecution that the accused appellant was absconding is totally unfounded because in the FIR, it was clearly mentioned that the accused appellant after divorcing deceased Usha had started residing in his village Khatta, U.P. However, the Investigating Officer(PW-13) made no effort whatsoever to apprehend the accused appellant from his village. (vii) It has been admitted by material prosecution witnesses that deceased Usha was indulged in sex trade and that Sandeep Kumar used to solicit her services. Sandeep Kumar and Rajbir Singh(PW-14) were apprehended by the police on suspicion of the death of 12Usha, however, proper investigation was not made on this aspect. As per him, the possibility of Usha having been murdered by some other person cannot be ruled out. 19. Learned counsel concluded his submissions urging that the case is based purely on circumstantial evidence. The entire chain of incriminating circumstances has to be established leading to the only conclusion consistent with the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with the guilt of anyone else. As per the learned counsel, this chain was not established conclusively by cogent and clinching evidence and hence conviction of the accused appellant as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is unsustainable and should be set aside. Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State:- 20. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent State fervently and vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant and contended that the chain of incriminating circumstances is complete in all aspects exclusively pointing out towards the guilt of the accused. The learned counsel made the following pertinent submissions imploring the Court to 13dismiss the appeal and upheld the conviction of the accused appellant: - (i) That the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded as PW-1 during proceedings under Section 299 CrPC was rightly relied upon as admissible and reliable piece of evidence. The non-examination of Ashok Kumar Pathak during trial is not a deliberate act of prosecution, rather, the witness could not be examined during regular trial after apprehension of the accused appellant. The witness could not be traced by the prosecuting agency inspite of best efforts. The prolonged abscondence of the accused is primarily the reason for non-examination of Ashok Kumar Pathak. (ii) That the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak in his evidence as PW-1 during proceedings under Section 299 CrPC has admitted his signature on his statement[Exhibit PW-1/A(based upon which FIR was registered)] and also elaborated about the averments made therein which he had witnessed with his own eyes. 14(iii) That the evidence of Ashok Kumar Pathak clearly establishes the presence of accused appellant with Usha on intervening night of 19th/20th May, 1990, whereafter, the lady was found murdered and the accused was found absconding from the crime scene leaving behind a confessional note. Ashok Kumar Pathak also proved about the motive of the appellant to commit the crime. (iv) The testimony of Usha’s sister Sudha(PW-10) establishes that the accused appellant used to quarrel with Usha suspecting her infidelity and there were repeated altercations between the spouses. They had indulged in a fight just four days prior to the incident. This also establishes the motive attributed to the appellant to commit the offence. (v) That there is no evidence on record to show that accused appellant and Usha were divorced except a bald statement made in this regard in the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E). 15(vi) That the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) submitted by the handwriting expert, Deepa Verma(PW-24) proves that the handwriting on the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) which was recovered from the crime scene matched with the handwriting on the two admitted documents(Exhibits PW-12/C and PW- 12/D) collected from the employer of the accused appellant and specimen handwritings(Exhibits PW- 5/D, PW-5/E and PW-5/F) given by the accused appellant to the police which in turn concludes the fact that the confession note is in the handwriting of the accused. 21. He urged that the prosecution has proved the case against the accused appellant by leading cogent and convincing chain of incriminating circumstantial evidence and implored the court to dismiss the appeal. 22. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the judgments of the trial Court and the High Court as well as the evidence available on record. 16Discussion and Conclusion: - 23. The main thrust of submissions advanced by Shri Ambreesh Kumar Aggarwal, learned legal aid counsel representing the appellant so as to criticise the findings of the trial Court and the High Court was that both the Courts erred in holding that the statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak had been recorded on oath in the proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. As per Shri Aggarwal, only the Section 161 CrPC statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was exhibited by the Investigating Officer(PW-13) and he never stepped into the witness box. 24. In order to verify this fervent submission of learned counsel for the appellant, we carefully sifted through the record and find that the submission so made is without any foundation. The accused appellant was absconding and could not be arrested and thus, the Investigating Officer(PW-13) made all possible efforts including the procurement of warrant of arrest, attempt to serve the same at the village of the appellant, i.e., Khatta, U.P. He tried to locate the accused appellant at various locations, without any success. The warrant which is available on record clearly bears the address of the accused appellant as Khatta, Prahladpur, Bagpat, U.P. 1725. Even proceedings of proclamation and attachment were undertaken under Sections 82 and 83 CrPC but to no avail because the accused appellant had vanished after the crime and was not traceable at the crime scene or at his known address i.e. village Khatta, U.P. The fact regarding his abscondence was also published. Accordingly, a charge sheet came to be filed under Section 299 CrPC showing the accused appellant to be an absconder. 26. The trial Court passed an order dated 18th March, 1991 declaring the accused appellant to be an absconder and permission was granted to the prosecution to proceed with the trial by resorting to the procedure under Section 299 CrPC. This order was never questioned before any court of law.

--- JUDGMENT 463 ---
27. The trial Judge recorded the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak, the complainant as PW-1 under Section 299 CrPC on 17th July, 1991 after administrating oath to him which begins in the following manner: - “Shri Ashok Kumar Pathak, s/o Shri Ram Puran aged 28 years, R/O Kartar Nagar, Gali No. 14, Delhi on S.A.(sworn affirmation)” 1828. This statement bears the signature of the presiding officer of the Court and so also of the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak. Three more witnesses, namely, Head Constables Mohan Lal and Surender Kumar and Inspector Bal Kishan were also examined on oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 29. In this background, the fervent submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the prosecution only exhibited the statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded under Section 161 CrPC and that he was never examined on oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC seems to have been made out of sheer ignorance and without ascertaining the correct position from the original record. 30. Section 299 of CrPC expressly provides for the power of the Court to record evidence in absence of the accused in the following term: - “299. Record of evidence in absence of accused.—(1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the court competent to try or commit for trial, such person for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable. 19(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been committed by some person or persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the First Class shall hold an inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any depositions so taken may be given in evidence against any person who is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.” 31. Sub-section (1) of Section 299 CrPC is in two parts, the first part provides for proof of jurisdictional fact in respect of abscondence of an accused person and the second that there was no immediate prospect of arresting him. In the event, an order under the said provision is passed, deposition of any witness taken in the absence of an accused may be used against him if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without any amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable. 32.

--- JUDGMENT 464 ---
This Court in the case of Nirmal Singh v. State of Haryana1 while considering the issue that under what circumstances and by what method, the statement of a witness under Section 299 of CrPC could have been tendered in the case for being admissible 1 (2000) 4 SCC 41 20under Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and whether they can form the basis of conviction, held as follows: “4. …..Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure consists of two parts. The first part speaks of the circumstances under which witnesses produced by the prosecution could be examined in the absence of the accused and the second part speaks of the circumstances when such deposition can be given in evidence against the accused in any inquiry or trial for the offence with which he is charged. This procedure contemplated under Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is thus an exception to the principle embodied in Section 33 of the Evidence Act inasmuch as under Section 33, the evidence of a witness, which a party has no right or opportunity to cross-examine is not legally admissible. Being an exception, it is necessary, therefore, that all the conditions prescribed, must be strictly complied with. In other words, before recording the statement of the witnesses produced by the prosecution, the court must be satisfied that the accused has absconded or that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, as provided under the first part of Section 299(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure…. …..There possibly cannot be any dispute with the proposition of law that for taking the benefits of Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the conditions precedent therein must be duly established and the prosecution, which proposes to utilise the said statement as evidence in trial, must, therefore, prove about the existence of the preconditions before tendering the evidence. …. ….On a mere perusal of Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as well as Section 33 of the Evidence Act, we have no hesitation to come to the conclusion that the preconditions in both the sections must be established by the prosecution and it is only then, the statements of witnesses recorded under Section 299 CrPC before the arrest of the accused can be utilised in evidence in trial after the arrest of such accused only if the persons are dead or would not be available or any other condition enumerated in the second part of Section 299(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure is established….” (emphasis supplied) 2133. Further, in the case of Jayendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra & Another 2 it was held as follows: - “25. It is also beyond any cavil that the provisions of Section 299 of the Code must receive strict interpretation, and, thus, scrupulous compliance therewith is imperative in character. It is a well-known principle of interpretation of statute that any word defined in the statutory provision should ordinarily be given the same meaning while construing the other provisions thereof where the same term has been used. Under Section 3 of the Evidence Act like any other fact, the prosecution must prove by leading evidence and a definite categorical finding must be arrived at by the court in regard to the fact required to be proved by a statute. Existence of an evidence is not enough but application of mind by the court thereupon as also the analysis of the materials and/or appreciation thereof for the purpose of placing reliance upon that part of the evidence is imperative in character. 29. Indisputably both the conditions contained in the first part of Section 299 of the Code must be read conjunctively and not disjunctively. Satisfaction of one of the requirements should not be sufficient….” (emphasis supplied) 34. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak dated 17th July, 1991 recorded in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC is as follows: - “I am working as Salesman/supply man in the M/s R.P. Associates a shop of medicines in Bhagirath Place for the last about seven years. In my neighbourhood accused Sukhpal along with his wife Usha and children used to reside in H.No.387 Gali No.14 Kartar Nagar for the last 3/4 years prior to this case. He was having two daughters and one son.

--- JUDGMENT 465 ---
Later on he also joined service in M/s R.P. Associates, Bhagirath Place with my assistance. Accused suspected infidelity of his wife Smt. Usha and for this reason they were not having good relations and they always used to quarrel with each other. Prior to the occurrence of this case accused left his house leaving his wife Smt. Usha and three children at the above said house for his village Khatta in UP and used to come to his shop therefrom. 2 (2009) 7 SCC 104 22Sometimes they used to visit with his wife Usha at his house. About four days back prior to this occurrence accused Sukhpal had come to his house where sister of Usha was also found present with Usha at his house and on that day Sukhpal had quarrelled with his wife Usha and he then returned. Next day sister of Usha also left with three children of Usha to her house, leaving her sister alone at her house. On 19.5.1990 at about 10.30 P.M. I saw accused Usha & Sukhpal who came on a cycle to his house having conversation with his wife, sitting on a cot in the court-yard of his house, and I went on the roof of my house, and slept. In the night when the rain was started I came down from the roof and I saw the accused Sukhpal along with his wife Usha going into inside their room. Both of them went inside their room. Next morning due to holiday(closeday being Sunday) I woke up some late and started my daily routine work. I found the cycle of Sukhpal parked in the court-yard of his house. I thought that both of them might be in their room. In the noon I again found the cycle of Sukhpal parked in the court-yard of the house but none of them was seen outside their room. In the evening at about 5.30 P.M. when I called them but no response came from his house but the door of the room was opened. When I entered the room of Usha I found Smt. Usha dead lying on the cot and accused Sukhpal was found missing therefrom. I informed the nearby residents who called the police. Accused Sukhpal had run away from his house after committing the murder of his wife Usha in the night. Police came there and completed the proceedings. I save my statement to the police and I signed my statement which is Ex.PW-1/A and is correct. Other mohalla people also collected there. There were many injuries on the throat and shoulder, neck of Smt. Usha. There was blood on the bed sheet on which medicines were found scattered and letter written in Hindi by accused Sukhpal regarding the murder of his wife Usha was also found under the cot. I identify the hand-writing of Sukhpal on that letter, because he was working with me at the aforesaid medicine shop where we used to prepare and write the documents. I have seen him signing and writing the documents at the above said shop with me. Police seized that letter vide a memo Ex.PW1/B and I signed the same. One old cycle make Avon of accused Sukhpal was seized vide a memo which is Ex.PW1/D. I signed the same. I had seen the accused using that cycle earlier also and so I identify this case to be of accused Sukhpal. Surinder Kumar who was also present there also signed the memo. 23On 22.5.1990 I was present on my duty at the shop of M/s R.P. Associates, 1696/8 Ist floor Mohan Building Bhagirath Place where accused Sukhpal also used to work. On that day police officials visited the shop where Sanjiv Kumar, owner of the above said shop reduced two letters to the police. One letter was an application for resignation from the service written by Sukhpal to M/s R.P. Associates and another letter at 12.6.89 addressed to R.P. Associates requesting for service to him. Both these letters were written and signed by accused Sukhpal. I identify his writing and signature on it. These letters are Ext.PW/E and Ex.PW/F. These letters were seized vide memo Ex.PW1/G and I signed it. The letter addressed to the police officer written by Sukhpal which was seized from the spot by the police is Ex.P1. which was taken into possession vide memo Ex.PW1/B. Sanjiv Jain owner of the above said shop produced one page of the letter pad to the police who seized the same vide memo Ex.PW1/H and I signed the same.” 35. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak(reproduced supra) gives positive and unwavering proof of the following circumstances: - (i) The accused appellant Sukhpal was married to Usha(deceased). (ii) There was an ongoing marital strife between the spouses owing to the suspected infidelity of Usha and on this ground, they used to quarrel with each other. The accused appellant left his wife Usha and his three children and started living in village Khatta, U.P. The accused suspected infidelity of Usha imputes a strong motive to the accused for her murder. 24(iii) Ashok Kumar Pathak had facilitated a job for the accused appellant in M/s. R.P.

--- JUDGMENT 466 ---
Associates. (iv) Inspite of the strife and acrimonious relationship, the accused appellant often used to visit his wife Usha and would stay with her. He had come and stayed with Usha four days before the incident and at that time, Sudha, sister of Usha was also present. Sukhpal quarrelled with Usha in presence of her sister and then went away. (v) A day prior to the incident also, accused appellant had come to House No. J-387, Gali No. 4, Kartar Nagar, Delhi where the alleged incident took place and stayed with Usha. (vi) The witness Ashok Kumar Pathak saw the accused appellant parking his cycle in the courtyard of the house. He also saw the accused appellant(Sukhpal) and wife(Usha) talking to each other while sitting on a cot in the courtyard. Then it started raining whereupon, both were seen going into the house from the courtyard. On the next morning, neither the accused appellant nor Usha were anywhere to be seen. 25(vii) The witness went to Usha’s house in the evening and saw her dead body lying on cot with large number of injuries whereas the accused appellant was missing. The cycle of the accused appellant was still parked in the courtyard of the house. (viii) A handwritten note(Exhibit PW-12/E) confessing to the murder was found lying underneath the cot on which the dead body was lying. The witness categorically stated that this note was written in the handwriting of the accused appellant which the witness was able to identify on account of both having worked together in the same concern(M/s. R.P.

--- JUDGMENT 467 ---
38. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak by itself provides a complete chain of circumstantial evidence sufficient to establish the guilt of the accused appellant. The accused appellant vanished from the crime scene and remained absconding for a period of nearly 10 years. He could be apprehended on 9th August, 2000, whereafter, regular trial was conducted. During the period of abscondence of the accused appellant, the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak seems to have left his house at Kartar Nagar, Delhi where he used to reside earlier. Despite ample efforts being made by the Investigating Agency to summon and examine Ashok Kumar Pathak, he could not be traced out and produced in the witness box for deposition during trial after the accused had been arrested. 39. Viewed in light of the provisions of Section 299 CrPC read with Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 as interpreted by this Court in the case of Nirmal Singh(supra) and Jayendra Vishnu Thakur(supra), the trial Court was justified in holding that 27the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded in these proceedings was fit to be read as a piece of substantive evidence. We concur with the findings recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court on this vital aspect of the matter.

--- JUDGMENT 468 ---
40. Sudha(PW-10), sister of deceased Usha also stated that the accused appellant used to quarrel with his wife Usha suspecting her infidelity. The witness also stated that the accused appellant had come to the house of Usha in her presence about four days before the incident and went away after fighting with Usha. Thus, evidence of this witness also establishes the motive attributed to the accused appellant for commission of the murder. Her testimony is also sufficient to conclude that inspite of the acrimonious relations between the husband and wife, the accused appellant used to visit Usha frequently from the village Khatta, U.P. where he was residing after having abandoned his wife and children. 41. The witness Sanjiv Jain(PW-8), employer of accused appellant gave evidence to the effect that the Investigating Officer(PW-13) collected the admitted writings of the accused(Exhibit PW-12/C and Exhibit PW-12/D) from him during the course of the investigation. Sanjiv Jain(PW-8) had no motive 28whatsoever so as to falsely implicate the accused in this case. He had provided employment to the accused which fact is not disputed. The version of Sanjiv Jain(PW-8) to the effect that the Investigating Officer(PW-13) collected the scripts/documents written by the accused while working in his establishment finds corroboration from the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded in the proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 42. The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the two persons namely, Sandeep Kumar and Rajbir Singh(PW-14) were involved in an illicit affair with Usha and they might have murdered the lady has no legs to stand because in view of what has been stated by Ashok Kumar Pathak in his testimony recorded under Section 299 CrPC, it is clear that no one other than the accused appellant was present in the house with Usha on the night she was murdered. 43. The Investigating Officer(PW-13) duly proved the process of arrest of accused on 9th August, 2000, i.e., after more than 10 years of the incident. 44. The specimen writings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) of the accused appellant were lawfully collected by the Investigating Officer(PW-13) after he was arrested and all these documents were 29placed on record with the charge sheet. These specimen writings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) and the admitted writings(Exhibits PW-12/C and PW-12/D) of the accused appellant along with confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) recovered from the crime scene were sent to the handwriting expert(PW-24) for comparison from where a report(Exhibit PW-12/F) was received to the effect that the handwritings on these documents match with each other. As is required under law, the handwriting expert Deepa Verma was examined as a witness(PW-24) and she proved the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) establishing the fact that the handwriting on the confessional note(Exhibit PW-12/E) recovered from the crime scene matched with the handwriting of the accused appellant on the specimen and admitted writings. 45. The Investigating Officer(PW-13) gave unimpeachable evidence proving the various steps taken by him for collection of evidence during investigation so as to link the accused appellant with murder of Usha. The fact that the accused appellant was present with Usha on the night preceding the murder is firmly established from the deposition of Ashok Kumar Pathak. He went absconding after the murder and could not be traced out for almost 3010 years which is also a strong circumstance pointing towards his guilty state of mind. 46. The circumstances leading to murder of Usha were in the exclusive knowledge of the appellant. He has offered no explanation as to the manner in which Usha was strangled to death within the confines of the room where only he and the deceased were present. The bald plea of denial offered by the accused by way of an explanation to this gravely incriminating circumstance is not sufficient to absolve him of the burden cast upon him by virtue of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 47. As a consequence of the above discussion, we are of the firm view that the prosecution has established the following links in the chain of incriminating circumstantial evidence: - (i) Motive; (ii) Last seen together; (iii) Medical evidence establishing that the cause of death of the deceased was homicidal. (iv) Confessional note; (v) Abscondence for nearly 10 years; 31(vi) Wrong explanation given by the accused in his statement under Section 313 CrPC; (vii) Failure of the accused to offer explanation for the homicidal death of his wife in the night time when only the accused and deceased were present in the house leading to the interference of guilt by virtue of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 48. Connected together, all these facts form a clinching and complete chain of incriminating circumstances pointing exclusively towards the guilt of the accused appellant and totally inconsistent with his innocence or the involvement of any other person in the crime. 49. Consequently, we have no hesitation in confirming the view taken by the trial Court and the High Court in convicting and affirming the conviction of the accused appellant for the charge of committing murder of Usha. 50. The impugned judgments do not suffer from any infirmity warranting any interference. 51. Hence, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed as such. 3252. The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds are cancelled. He shall surrender before the trial Court within the next 60 days to serve the remainder of the sentence. In case the appellant fails to surrender before the trial Court within the aforesaid period, the trial Court shall take steps to apprehend him and make him serve out the sentence. 53.

--- JUDGMENT 469 ---
CORRECTED 2024 INSC 400 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 5154 OF 2024) ARVIND KEJRIWAL ..... APPELLANT VERSUS DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT ..... RESPONDENT O R D E R Leave granted. 2. Arvind Kejriwal in this appeal has challenged the order and judgment passed by the trial court and the High Court of Delhi, upholding his arrest by the Directorate of Enforcement1 on 21.03.2024. 3. A number of legal pleas and issues have been raised, including the scope and violation of Section 19 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. We have heard learned counsel appearing for both the appellant as well as DoE at some length, albeit hearing is yet to conclude and considered decision will take time. 4. In view of the prolongation of proceedings, in the hearing held on 03.05.2024, we had put the parties to notice, that the Court may examine the question of 1 For short, ‘DoE’. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 470 ---
5. DoE had registered ECIR No. HIU-II/14/2022 on 22.08.2022 pursuant to registration of the predicate offences by the Central Bureau of Investigation2 on 17.08.2022 in RC No. 0032022A0053 under Section 120-B read with Section 447A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. This RC was registered on the complaint dated 20.07.2022 made by the Lieutenant Governor of the Government of NCT of Delhi and on the directions of the competent authority conveyed by Director, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 6. The investigation by the DoE resulted in filing of the first prosecution complaint on 26.11.2022. The Special Court took cognisance on 20.12.2022. Thereafter, DoE has filed four supplementary prosecution complaints. CBI has filed a chargesheet, followed by two supplementary chargesheets. However, charges have not been framed. 7. At this stage, it is not possible for us to either conclude the arguments or finally pronounce the judgment. However, there is an intervening factor which has prompted us to consider and pass the present order, namely, 18th Lok Sabha General Elections, which are in progress. As the appeal is pending before us, we do not think it would be proper for us to direct the appellant – Arvind Kejriwal to approach the trial court for interim bail/release. This may not be apt in view of the legal issues and contentions that are under examination and consideration before us. 2 For short, ‘CBI’. Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl.) No.

--- JUDGMENT 471 ---
5154 of 2024 Page 2 of 88. It is no gain saying that General Elections to Lok Sabha is the most significant and an important event this year, as it should be in a national election year. Between 650-700 million voters out of an electorate of about 970 million will cast their votes to elect the government of this country for the next five years. General Elections supply the vis viva to a democracy.3 Given the prodigious importance, we reject the argument raised on behalf of the prosecution that grant of interim bail/release on this account would be giving premium of placing the politicians in a benefic position compared to ordinary citizens of this country. While examining the question of grant of interim bail/release, the courts always take into consideration the peculiarities associated with the person in question and the surrounding circumstances. In fact, to ignore the same would be iniquitous and wrong. 9. We will now refer to some case law on the power to grant interim bail/release, which power is exercised routinely even by the trial courts. 10. In Mukesh Kishanpuria v. State of West Bengal4, this Court has held that the power to grant regular bail includes the power to grant interim bail, particularly in view of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 11. Sunil Fulchand Shah v. Union of India and Others5 observes that parole by way of temporary release can be granted by Government or its functionaries in case of detenus under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974. Further, the High Courts and this Court can direct temporary release of a detenu for specified reasons 3 See Mohinder Singh Gill and Another v. Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and Others, (1978) 1 SCC 405. 4 (2010) 15 SCC 154. 5 (2000) 3 SCC 409. Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl.) No. 5154 of 2024 Page 3 of 8when the request is unjustifiably rejected by the authorities. However, the power of temporary release of a detenu suffering preventive detention is exercised only in extreme and deserving cases. 12. In Dadu @ Tulsidas v. State of Maharashtra6, notwithstanding Section 32A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 19857, which prohibits the appellate court from suspending sentence awarded to the convict, this restriction, it is observed, does not affect the power and authority of the court to grant parole or furlough, even where a person has been convicted and sentenced and his appeal has been dismissed. 13. Athar Pervez v. State8, a judgment of the Delhi High Court authored by one of us (Sanjiv Khanna), on the power to grant interim bail in cases registered under the NDPS Act, in addition to the judgments noted, refers to Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra and Others9, which decision leans on the Constitutional Bench judgment in Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State of Punjab10, and Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Another11, and observes: “20. The expression “interim” bail is not defined in the Code. It is an innovation by legal neologism which has gained acceptance and recognition. The terms, “interim” bail/“interim” suspension of sentence, have been used and accepted as part of legal vocabulary and are well known expressions. The said terms are used in contradistinction and to distinguish release on regular bail during pendency of trial or appeal till final adjudication. Applications for “interim” suspension or bail 6 (2000) 8 SCC 437. 7 For short, the ‘NDPS Act’. 8 2016 SCC Online Del 6662. 9 (2011) 1 SCC 694. 10 (1980) 2 SCC 565. 11 (1986) 3 SCC 156. Crl.

--- JUDGMENT 472 ---
15. The prosecution has rightly pointed out that the appellant – Arvind Kejriwal had failed to appear in spite of nine (9) notices/summons, first of which was issued in October 2023. This is a negative factor, but there are several other facets which we are required to take into consideration. The appellant – Arvind Kejriwal is the Chief Minister of Delhi and a leader of one of the national parties. No doubt, serious accusations have been made, but he has not been convicted. He does not have any criminal antecedents. He is not a threat to the society. The investigation in the present case has remained pending since August 2022. Arvind Kejriwal was arrested, as noted above, on 21.03.2024. More importantly, legality and validity of the arrest itself is under challenge before this Court and we are yet to finally pronounce on the same. The fact situation cannot be compared with harvesting of crops or plea to look after business affairs. In this background, once the matter is subjudice and the questions relating to legality of arrest are under consideration, a Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl.) No. 5154 of 2024 Page 5 of 8more holistic and libertarian view is justified, in the background that the 18th Lok Sabha General Elections are being held. 16. We will now refer to the judgments relied on behalf of the DoE: (i) In Anukul Chandra Pradhan v. Union of India and Others12, this Court rejected the constitutional challenge to sub-section (5) to Section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, observing that the right to vote is not a constitutional right, and that the right can be curtailed. Interestingly, the proviso to the said sub-section states that a person subjected to preventive detention can vote. The prohibition was upheld on several grounds, including, inter alia, it promotes the object of free and fair elections. Indeed there are decisions of this Court that advert to the importance of elections in democracy, described as the barometer and lifeline of parliamentary system and its setup.13 (ii) In K. Ananda Nambiar and Another v. Chief Secretary to the Government of Madras and Others14, challenge to the Defence of India Rules, 1962 in its application to Members of Parliament, was rejected on the ground that members of the legislature cannot claim freedom from arrest. Detention does not violate privileges of the Members of Parliament. (iii) In State of Maharashtra v. Anand Chintaman Dighe15, this Court while allowing the appeal, observed that the High Court has misdirected itself in granting bail to an accused convicted under the Terrorist and Disruptive 12 (1997) 6 SCC 1. 13 See Anoop Baranwal v. Union of India (Election Commission Appointments), (2023) 6 SCC 161, quoting from S.R. Chaudhuri v. State of Punjab and Others, (2001) 7 SCC 126. 14 AIR 1966 SC 657. 15 (1990) 1 SCC 397. Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl.) No. 5154 of 2024 Page 6 of 8Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, by refusing to look into statements and further material collected by the investigating agency. 17. We would reject the argument that the reasoning recorded by us in paragraphs 7, 8 and 14, results in grant of privilege or special status to politicians. As observed in paragraphs 7, 8 and 14, several peculiarities of the case have weighed with us. In Siba Shankar Das @ Pintu v. State of Odisha and Another16, this Court accepting the appeal, deleted the condition imposed by the High Court stipulating that the appellant shall not be involved in any political activities, directly or indirectly. Imposition of this condition, the order holds, would breach fundamental rights. No such condition should be imposed. A coordinate Bench of this Court in State of Andhra Pradesh v. Nara Chandra Babu Naidu17, in an appeal filed by the State, by an interim order has deleted the condition restraining the respondent therein from organising or participating in public rallies and meetings, thereby permitting him to participate in the political process. This petition seeking special leave to appeal is still pending.

--- JUDGMENT 473 ---
23. The service provider is a registered Chit Fund company engaged in Chit business. Admittedly, the complainant had subscribed to certain chits in the said business. The subscription was made in the chit group 53005/Ticket No.9 for a chit value of Rs.1,00,000/- payable at the rate of Rs.2500/- per month for a period of 40 months. 4. It is the case of the complainant that the OP had illegally stopped the chit business in the year 1996. The complainant requested the OP to repay the chit amount deposited until stoppage of the business. The OP refused to re-pay the subscription amount since, according to it, the complainant owed certain dues to it and therefore, it adjusted the subscription amount against pending dues of the complainant. 5. Initially, the complainant sought to redress its grievance relating to non-refund of the subscription amount, before the authority constituted under the Chit Funds Act 1982.1 Thereafter, the OP filed WP No.22568/2012 with 9 other connected writ petitions against the order of the Additional Registrar. Whereas the Complainant also filed WP No.17045/2014 with 9 other connected writ petitions questioning the finding with regards to the 1The complainant had filed 10 cases before the Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Societies i.e., Dispute No.1062/2004-05 to 1071/2004-05, for recovery of adjusted amount, whereunder the Assistant Registrar passed an award and directed the OP to pay the amount to complainant. Against the said order OP unsuccessfully challenged the orders in appeals before Additional Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Aliaskar Road, Bangalore, in appeal No.33/CAP/2009-10 to No.42/CAP/2009-10. The Additional Registrar directed the opposite party to pay the award amount on the ground that said chit groups did not come under the Chit Fund Act. 3maintainability under the Chit Funds Act. On 16.11.2015, the High Court directed the complainant to approach the Consumer Forum and held that said cases were not maintainable under the Chit Funds Act. 6. It is against this background that the complaint comes to be filed before the District Forum alleging that the illegal termination of the chit fund business and consequent non-refund of the subscription amount, resulted in deficiency of service. The prayer in the complaint was for a direction to be issued to the OP to refund Rs.18,750/- along with future interest at the rate of 18% p.a. 7. In the written version, the OP, apart from contesting the claim on merits, raised a preliminary objection that the complaint is not maintainable since the complainant does not qualify the definition of a ‘consumer’. According to the OP, the service obtained by the complainant was for a commercial purpose, and by that fact, the complainant would stand excluded from availing any remedy under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. To demonstrate that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose, the OP relied on two circumstances: (a) the statement in the complainant that there was an ‘understanding between complainant and opposite party to promote chit business’; (b) findings2 of an internal audit conducted by the OP. 2 As per the Internal Audit, the Complainant held 1023 prized chits, and 1043 non-prized chits. The report also mentions various correspondences between the complainant and OP with regards to the increasing disparity between the total liability of the fund, and the paid-up value of the non-prized chits. As per the 48. Against the said pleadings available on record, the District Forum proceeded to frame the following issue: I. Whether the Complainant has proved the alleged deficiency in service by the Opposite Party? II. If so, to what relief the Complainant is entitled? 9. There was no specific issue framed on the preliminary question as to whether the complainant fell within the definition of consumer as understood under Section 2 (1) (d) of the Act of 1986. However, the District Forum did address itself, though incorrectly, to the objection of the OP that the complaint was not maintainable. Instead of examining whether the service availed on behalf of the complainant was for a commercial purpose, the District Forum determined whether the complainant fell within the definition of a “person” as defined in Section 2 (1)(m) of the Act. On merits, it found that there was, in fact, ‘deficiency in service’ and ordered for refund of the claimed amount with interest of 18% p.a. 10. In appeal, the State Forum has cursorily found that the District Forum was correct in concluding that there was deficiency in service, on merits. Nothing has been said, however, as regards the challenge to the audit report, the balance liability amounted to Rs. 1.86 crores. It was stated that owing non-payment of outstanding arrears, the foreman in accordance with Section 28 and Section 29 of the Chit Fund Act is bound to remove the defaulted non-prized subscriber to keep the chit running, hence the defaulted non- prized tickets maintained by Complainant were removed, and the paid amounts were adjusted against arrears in the prized chits. 5maintainability of the complaint even though a specific ground was taken in the memorandum of appeal towards that end.

--- JUDGMENT 474 ---
12. It is against the above backdrop that we are called upon to determine the present lis. Instead of remanding the matter back to the Consumer Forum we intend to decide the maintainability challenge here itself. The question that has eluded three judicial forums has now to be settled once and for all. That question simply is: Whether the service obtained by the complainant was for a commercial purpose? 613. Section 2 (7) of the Act defines a consumer to mean: Section 2 (7) "consumer" means any person who— (i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such use is made with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose; or (ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such service other than the person who hires or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned person, but does not include a person who avails of such service for any commercial purpose. Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,— (a) the expression "commercial purpose" does not include use by a person of goods bought and used by him exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood, by means of self-employment; (b) the expressions "buys any goods" and "hires or avails any services" includes offline or online transactions through electronic means or by teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level marketing; 14. The provision as it stands now (as extracted above) was not how it appeared when it was grafted in the original Act. The definition of ‘consumer’ has undergone textual amendments in 1993 and in 2002. For ease of reference, the evolutionary history of the provision from its origin until the 2019 Act is captured in the table below: 7Consumer The Consumer The Consumer Consumer Protection Act Protection Act Protection Protection 2019 1986 (Amendment) Act, (Amendment) Act, 1993 2002 “consumer” “consumer” means any “consumer” means any (7) "consumer" means any means any person person who,— person who,— person who— who,— (i) buys any goods for a (i) buys any goods for a (i) buys any goods for a (i) buys any goods consideration which consideration which has consideration which has for a consideration has been paid or been paid or promised or been paid or promised or which has been promised or partly paid partly paid and partly partly paid and partly paid or promised and partly promised, or promised, or under any promised, or under any or partly paid and under any system of system of deferred system of deferred partly promised, deferred payment and payment and includes payment and includes any or under any includes any user of any user of such goods user of such goods other system of deferred such goods other than other than the person than the person who buys payment and the person who buys who buys such goods for such goods for includes any user such goods for consideration paid or consideration paid or of such goods consideration paid or promised or partly paid promised or partly paid or other than the promised or partly paid or partly promised, or partly promised, or under person who buys or partly promised, or under any system of any system of deferred such goods for under any system of deferred payment when payment, when such use is consideration paid deferred payment when such use is made with the made with the approval of or promised or such use is made with approval of such person, such person, but does not partly paid or the approval of such but does not include a include a person who partly promised, person, but does not person who obtains such obtains such goods for or under any include a person who goods for resale or for resale or for any system of deferred obtains such goods for any commercial purpose; commercial purpose; or payment when resale or for any or (ii) hires or avails of any such use is made commercial purpose; or (ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration with the approval (ii) [hires or avails of] services for a which has been paid or of such person, but any services for a consideration which has promised or partly paid does not include a consideration which been paid or promised or and partly promised, or person who has been paid or partly paid and partly under any system of obtains such promised or partly paid promised, or under any deferred payment and goods for resale or and partly promised, or system of deferred includes any beneficiary of for any under any system of payment and includes such service other than the commercial deferred payment and any beneficiary of such person who hires or avails purpose; or includes any services other than the of the services for (ii)hires any beneficiary of such person who hires or consideration paid or services for a services other than the avails of the services for promised, or partly paid consideration person who [hires or consideration paid or and partly promised, or which has been avails of] the services promised, or partly paid under any system of paid or promised for consideration paid and partly promised, or deferred payment, when or partly paid and or promised, or partly under any system of such services are availed partly promised, paid and partly deferred payment, when of with the approval of the or under any promised, or under any such services are availed first mentioned person, but system of deferred system of deferred of with the approval of does not include a person payment and payment, when such the first mentioned who avails of such service includes any services are availed of person but does not for any commercial beneficiary of with the approval of the include a person who purpose. such services first mentioned person.

--- JUDGMENT 475 ---
avails of such services other than the 8person who hires Explanation.—For for any commercial Explanation. —For the the services for the purposes of sub- purpose. purposes of this clause, consideration paid clause (i), Explanation.—For the — or promised, or “commercial purposes of this clause, (a) the expression partly paid and purpose” does not “commercial purpose” "commercial purpose" partly promised, include use by a does not include use by a does not include use by a or under any consumer of goods person of goods bought person of goods bought system of deferred bought and used by and used by him and and used by him payment, when him exclusively for services availed by him exclusively for the such services are the purpose of exclusively for the purpose of earning his availed of with the earning his livelihood, purposes of earning his livelihood, by means of approval of the by means of self- livelihood by means of self-employment; first mentioned employment; self-employment; (b) the expressions "buys person any goods" and "hires or avails any services" includes offline or online transactions through electronic means or by teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level marketing; 15. Structurally, there are three parts to the definition of a consumer. We can deconstruct Section 2(7)(i) as a matter of illustration.3 The first part sets out the jurisdictional prerequisites for a person to qualify as a consumer – there must be purchase of goods, for consideration4 . The second part is an ‘exclusion clause’ [‘carve out’] which has the effect of excluding the person from the definition of a consumer. The carve out applies if the person has obtained goods for the purpose of ‘resale’ or for a ‘commercial purpose’. The third part is an exception to the exclusion clause – it relates to Explanation (a) to Section 2(7) which limits the scope of ‘commercial purpose’. According to the said explanation, the expression, ‘commercial 3 The logic can be identically extended to Section 2(7)(ii) 4 The consideration may have been paid or partly paid or agreed to be paid in future. 9purpose’ does not include persons who bought goods ‘exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood, by means of self-employment’. The significance of this structural break down will be discussed shortly.

--- JUDGMENT 476 ---
16. The carve out existed as part of the original enactment. However, the Explanation to Section 2(7) was inserted by amendment in 1993. 17. Judicial experience has shown us that the service providers most often than not take up a plea in their written version that the service obtained/goods bought was for a commercial purpose. For, if they succeed in their plea, the complainant is excluded from availing any benefit under the Act. According to Section 11, the District Forum has jurisdiction to entertain complaints ‘where the value of the goods or services and the compensation, if any, claimed does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs’. The expression ‘complaint’ is defined in Section 2(1)(7)(c) to mean any allegation made in writing by a complainant relating to certain enumerated subjects. A complainant is defined 2(1)(b) to mean a consumer, among other entities. Therefore, to file a complaint, one must be a complainant and for one to be a complainant, he must be a consumer. If a person fails to come within the definition of a consumer, he cannot be a complainant5 and therefore, such person cannot file a complaint under the Act. 5 Complainant is defined under Section 2 (1) (b) of the Act. A complainant means – (i) a consumer; or (ii) any voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act,1956 or under any other law for 1018. In the facts of the instant case, the OP had raised a plea in its version that the complainant does not satisfy the definition of consumer since the service was obtained for a commercial purpose. Sri Shailesh Madiyal, learned Senior Advocate for the OP has argued vehemently that the complainant has not pleaded let alone prove that the services availed by it was for securing the livelihood of the complainant by means of self- employment. According to Sri Shailesh Madiyal, the onus to prove that services were availed for earning livelihood rests on the complainant. In support of his submission, he has relied on Laxmi Engineering Works – (1995) 3 SCC 583; Leelavathi Kirtilal Medical Trust v. Unique Shanti Developers – (2020) 2 SCC 265; Cheema Engineering Services (1997) 1 SCC 131 and; Paramount Digital Lab (2018) 14 SCC 81. 19. Before we deal with the contention of Sri Shailesh Madiyal, it would be necessary to set out the manner in which consumer forums must decide technical pleas raised by service providers to the effect that the services obtained/goods bought was for a commercial purpose and, therefore, the complaint filed on behalf of such persons are not maintainable. The crucial step in deciding such pleas would turn on the manner in which the issues are framed. Unless the burden of proof is properly cast on the relevant party, the time being in force; or (iii) the Central Government or any State Government, who or which makes a complaint. 11the consumer forum would not be in a position to arrive at proper decision. Therefore, we proceed to provide some guidance on how the issues must be framed and the manner in which the evidence must be appreciated. 20. As we have shown above, the definition of consumer has three parts. The significance of deconstructing the definition into three parts was for the purpose of explaining on whom lies the onus to prove each of the different parts. There can hardly be any dispute that the onus of proving the first part i.e. that the person had bought goods/availed services for a consideration, rests on the complainant himself. The carve out clause, in the second part, is invoked by the service providers to exclude the complainants from availing benefits under the Act. The onus of proving that the person falls within the carve out must necessarily rest on the service provider and not the complainant. This is in sync with the general principle embodied in Section 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act that ‘one who pleads must prove’. Since it is always the service provider who pleads that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose, the onus of proving the same would have to be borne by it. Further, it cannot be forgotten that the Consumer Protection Act is a consumer-friendly and beneficial legislation intended to address grievances of consumers.6 Moreover, a negative burden cannot be placed on the 6 National Insurance Co. Ltd.

--- JUDGMENT 477 ---
v. Harsolia Motors and Ors. (2023) 8 SCC 362. 12complainant to show that the service available was not for a commercial purpose. 21. Having held that the onus to prove that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose is on the service provider, we may clarify the standard of proof that has to be met in order to discharge the onus. The standard of proof has to be measured against a ‘preponderance of probabilities’. The test to determine whether service obtained qualified as a commercial purpose is no longer res integra in view of this Court’s decision in Lilavathi v. Kiritlal (supra). Para 19 sets out the principles on which it must be determined whether the onus of proving ‘commercial purpose’ has been properly discharged by the service provider. 22. If and only if, the service provider discharges its onus of showing that the service was availed, in fact for a commercial purpose, does the onus shift back to the complainant to bring its case within the third part, i.e. the Explanation (a) to Section 2(7) – to show that the service was obtained exclusively for the purpose of earning its livelihood by means of self- employment. 23. In this background, we must consider the plea of Sri Shailesh Madiyal that the complainant has not pleaded nor proved that the service was obtained for earning his livelihood through the means of self- 13employment. His argument relates to the third part of the definition of consumer. The question of inquiring into the third part will only arise if the service provider succeeds in crossing the second part by discharging its onus and proving that the service obtained was for a commercial purpose. Unless the service provider discharges its onus, the onus does not shift back to the complainant to show that the service obtained was exclusively for earning its livelihood through the means of self-employment. In the facts of this case, the OP has merely pleaded in its version that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose. No evidence has been led to probabilise its case other than merely restating its claim on affidavit. It is now well too settled that a plea without proof and proof without plea is no evidence in the eyes of law. 24. We do not wish to address ourselves to the merits of the issue since three Forums have concurred in their finding that there was proved deficiency of service. 25. Accordingly, we dismiss the appeals. ….…………………………….J.

--- JUDGMENT 478 ---
2. The present appeals arise out of a decision of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 04.04.2023 in Application under Section 482 No. 30221 of 2017, whereby the High Court refused to quash a summoning order dated 24.08.2017 passed under Section 319 of the CrPC by the Additional District & Sessions Judge, 1Kanpur Dehat, where the Appellants herein were directed to face a trial for offence under Section 302 IPC. Both the Appellants being identically placed, their appeals are being dealt with together. 3. The issue that arises for our consideration is whether there is sufficient material against the Appellant prompting the Trial Court to pass a summoning order under Section 319 CrPC The principles of law being settled by the judgments of the constitutional benches of this Court, this question hinges upon the facts of the present case, which is as follows: 4. Facts and investigation: On 10.05.2011, the first informant (PW-1), who is the mother of the deceased, got an FIR lodged at P.S. Ghatampur, informing that her son was found dead near a tubewell in the wheat field of a fellow villager. In her statement, she alleged that her son was murdered by the present appellants, the father of the appellants, along with two others, due to certain old enmity existing between the two families. 5. The following day, the investigation officer recorded a statement of PW-1 under Section 161 CrPC In this statement she also stated that the deceased was quarrelsome, had a habit of picking up fights with other villagers and had a few criminal cases going on against them. Previously, he had also picked up fights 2with the father of the appellants. She stated that on 08.05.2011, Mahendra Singh, a gangster of the same village, came on a bike and asked the deceased to accompany him, on the pretext that Mahendra Singh would pay back a sum of Rs. 8,000 which he had borrowed from PW-1, and also that he would help the deceased arrive at a compromise with Accused No. 1 (father of the appellants) and Accused No.

--- JUDGMENT 479 ---
3. Accordingly, the deceased left on the motorcycle of Mahendra Singh. She stated that Accused Nos. 1-3 were standing at a distance noticing the developments. She stated with conviction that Accused Nos. 1-3 along with Mahendra Singh killed the deceased. In this statement, PW-1 stated that the appellants were not involved and that she wrote their name in her first information statement incorrectly and without collecting full information. Two other persons (witness), Rajau Sengar and Karan Singh, in their Section 161 statements reiterated the statement of PW-1. Even they stated that the present appellants had no role whatsoever in the commission of the crime. 6. After conducting the investigation, the IO filed a chargesheet on 22.06.2011, where the present appellants were not named as accused. There were only four named accused in the chargesheet, however, Mahendra Singh who was arrayed as Accused No. 4 was 3absconding. It was categorically stated in the chargesheet that after investigation, it came to light that the naming of the present appellants was false. 7. Trial: On 20.05.2016, PW-1 was examined where she stated that “My old enmity with accused Bacha Singh has been going in for the last 11 years and on the basis of suspicion, I had written the names of Shankar and Vishal in the FIR.” However, at a later stage of her examination, she stated that “It is wrong to suggest that because of old enmity, I have wrongly written the names of Bacha Singh and his sons in the FIR”. Apart from PW-1, none of the other 5 witness, spoke about the complicity of the appellants in the commission of the offence. 8. Trial Court: Pursuant to the statement made by PW-1 in her examination in chief, the Assistant Public Prosecutor, on 31.07.2017, filed an application under Section 319 of the CrPC to summon the appellants herein to face the trial. 9. The Ld. Trial Court, on 24.08.2017, allowed the application filed by the APP after noting certain previous decisions of this Court where it was held that if the evidence tendered in the course of trial shows that any person not named as an accused has a role to play in the commission of the offence, then he could be 4summoned to face trial even though he may not have been charge sheeted. 10. High Court: The above order passed by the Trial Court was challenged by the Appellants before the High Court by filing a petition under Section 482 CrPC This petition came to be dismissed by the High Court by its order dated 04.04.2023. While dismissing the petition, the High Court noted that at the stage of Section 482, the Court is only supposed to see if there exists a prima-facie case. It is this order of the High Court which is impugned before us. 11. Issue: The only question arising in the present appeal is whether the power under Section 319 CrPC has been properly exercised in light of the facts of the present case and evidence on record.

--- JUDGMENT 480 ---
13. At the outset, we may note that the four accused who were charge-sheeted, have passed away. As against them, the trial has abated. The learned counsel for the Respondent State has argued 5that even if the trial has abated against existing accused, there is no bar in summoning the appellants and starting the trial afresh1. This position of law is well-settled and the learned counsel for the appellant has also not disputed the same. 14. In this background, we will examine the legality of the summoning order under Section 319 CrPC on its own footing. Section 319 of the CrPC is as follows: “319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence (1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed against such person for the offence which he appears to have committed. (2) ….

--- JUDGMENT 481 ---
(4) ….” 15. Having taken note of the provision, we will note the principles laid down by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92, for criminal courts to follow while exercising power under Section 319 CrPC: “94. In Pyare Lal Bhargava v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1094, a four-Judge Bench of this 1 Gurmail Singh v. State of UP, (2022) 10 SCC 684. 6Court was concerned with the meaning of the word “appear”. The Court held that the appropriate meaning of the word “appears” is “seems”. It imports a lesser degree of probability than proof. In Ram Singh v. Ram Niwas, (2009) 14 SCC 25, a two-Judge Bench of this Court was again required to examine the importance of the word “appear” as appearing in the section. The Court held that for the fulfilment of the condition that it appears to the court that a person had committed an offence, the court must satisfy itself about the existence of an exceptional circumstance enabling it to exercise an jurisdiction. What is, therefore, necessary for the court is to arrive at a satisfaction that the evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution, if unrebutted, may lead to conviction of the persons sought to be added as the accused in the case. 95. At the time of taking cognizance, the court has to see whether a prima facie case is made out to proceed against the accused. Under Section 319 CrPC, though the test of prima facie case is the same, the degree of satisfaction that is required is much stricter… 105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary and an power. It is to be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge is of the opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the evidence led before the court that such power should be exercised and not in a casual and cavalier manner. 106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the evidence led before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-examination, it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is more 7than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of such satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power under Section 319 CrPC…..” 16. The degree of satisfaction required to exercise power under Section 319 CrPC is well settled after the above-referred decision. The evidence before the trial court should be such that if it goes unrebutted, then it should result in the conviction of the person who is sought to be summoned. As is evident from the above- referred decision, the degree of satisfaction that is required to exercise power under Section 319 CrPC is much stricter, considering that it is a discretionary and an extra-ordinary power. Only when the evidence is strong and reliable, can the power be exercised. It requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity. 17. In this background, we will examine the evidence on record which prompted the trial court to exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC PW-1, who is the mother of the deceased, is the only witness who has named the appellants. 817.1 In the first information statement, she has taken the name of the appellants as having played a role in the commission of the crime owing to the past enmity between the two families. The relevant portion of this statement is as follows: “I am quite sure that my son Vijay Singh has been jointly murdered by Bachha Singh s/o Mohan Singh, Shankar s/o Bacha Singh, Vishal s/o Bacha Singh- residents of Raha and Sanjay s/o Munna Singh, Kallu Singh s/o Munna Singh-residents of Jalala, Police Station Ghatampur. We have an old existing enmity with these people.” 17.2 However, in her Section 161 statement, she has stated that the appellants were not involved and that she named them without collecting full information. Two other witness, Rajau Sengar and Karan Singh, in their Section 161 statements have also stated that the appellants had no role whatsoever in the commission of the crime. Relevant portion of PW-1’s statement under Section 161 CrPC, is as follows:- “…I had lent Rs. 8000 to Mahendra Singh long ago after selling Lahi. Vijay Singh had asked Mahendra Singh many times to repay the borrowed money but he did not give it back. Coming under the guise of this assurance, Vijay Singh left on Mahendra’s motorcycle. Sanjay Singh and Kallu Singh sons of Munna Singh and Bacha Singh s/o Mohan Singh were also standing at some distance outside the house. They also lured my son Vijay Singh and accompanied Vijay Singh and Mahendra Singh and 9all four of them killed my son Vijay Singh and threw the dead body in the field near the tubewell of Mahendra Pratap Singh Bhadoria. The names of Shankar Singh and Vishal Singhs sons of Bachha Singh, which I have written in the FIR, have been written by me falsely without collecting full information. My son Vijay Singh was murdered by Mahendra Singh s/o Chandrapal Singh Sachan of village Laukaha, Bacha Singh s/o Mohan Singh of village Raha and Sanjay Singh and Kallu Singh s/o Munna Singh of village Jalala. Shankar and Vishal sons of Bacha Singh were not involved in my son’s murder.” (emphasis supplied) 17.3 Even in the chargesheet, which was filed after investigation, the name of the appellants has not been mentioned as accused. 17.4 It is only in her deposition before the trial court that PW-1 has once again named the appellants. However, she has also stated that she has named them only on the basis of suspicion. The relevant portion of her deposition before the Trial Court is as follows: “In my report, I made Bachha Singh, Shankar, Vishal, Kallu Singh and Mahendra Sachan accused. I had an old enmity with these people.” In her cross-examination, PW-1 stated as follows:- “There were two-three outstation cases and two-three local cases from the village were pending against my son Vijay Singh, which are closed now. The said cases were closed/concluded during the lifetime of Vijay Singh. My old enmity with accused Bacha 10Singh has been going on for the last 11 years and on the basis of suspicion, I had written the names of Shankar and Vishal in the FIR.” 18. It is evident from the above that the appellants were named in the first information statement, however, in the statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C, PW-1 clarified that the names of appellants were written in the FIR falsely and without full information. She has also stated that the appellants were not involved in the murder of her son. Even in the charge sheet, the names of the appellants were not mentioned as accused. It is only in her deposition before the Trial Court the names of the accused resurfaces again. 19. None of the other witnesses, being PW’s-2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 have deposed anything about the appellants. 20. On 31.07.2017, i.e. almost a year after the deposition of PW- 1, the prosecution chose to file an application under Section 319 CrPC to the following effect:- “It is most respectfully submitted that in the above mentioned case, the first informant Mrs. Sheela Singh had written the names of Shankar Singh and Vishal Singh in the First Information Report and the names of Shankar Singh and Vishal Singh have also been mentioned by her in her examination in chief also. For this reason, it is necessary to summon Shankar Singh and Vishal Singh for trial in the said case. 11Therefore, the Hon’ble court is requested to kindly pass an order thereby summoning accused Shankar Singh and Vishal Singh sons of Bachha Singh for trial in the said case. Yours faithfully, Sd/-illegible 31.7.2017” 21. At the first place, PW-1 has named the appellants in the FIR despite not being an eyewitness to the offence. In her statement under Section 161, she sought to clarify the position by recording that her family had a long-standing enmity with appellants’ family. She also stated that the names of the appellants were mentioned and written by her “falsely without collecting full information.” She categorically stated that the appellants are not involved in the murder of her son. 22. When we contrast this statement with her deposition given five years later, we do not see a drastic change in the stand of PW-1. Even in her chief examination, she had stated that she had an old enmity with the family of the accused. However, in her cross examination, she clarified that as the enmity with the appellants family was going on for the last eleven years, names of the appellants were mentioned in the FIR on the basis of suspicion. Therefore, the change of circumstance which the prosecution 12seeks to contend on the basis of PW-1’s deposition does not satisfy the requirement of Section 319 at all. 23. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that PW-1, not being an eye-witness, her deposition is not sufficient enough to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Section 319 to summon the appellants. 24. There are no other witnesses who have deposed against the appellants. There is no documentary evidence that the prosecution had collected against the appellants. There is absolutely no role that is attributed to the appellants. We are of the opinion that the deposition of PW-1 is also in line and consistent with her statement under Section 161. When these factors are looked in a holistic manner, it would be clear that the higher degree of satisfaction that is required for exercising power under Section 319 CrPC is not met in the present case.

--- JUDGMENT 482 ---
A brief review of facts is necessary to adjudicate the present controversy. 3.1 The respondent was appointed a dealer for petrol/diesel/motor oil/grease and other such products of the appellant(s) by way Dealership Agreement1 dated 1st February 1997. 3.2 On 18th August 2007, certain officials of one SGS India2 claiming to be an agency appointed by the appellant(s) arrived at the respondent’s petrol pump and took samples of High Speed Diesel (HSD) and Motor Spirit (MS). 3.3 The appellant issued show cause notice against the respondent dated 20th August, 2007, wherein the respondent was asked to submit a response to the alleged irregularities within a period of 7 days. 3.4 On the basis of the Preliminary Test Report, the Senior Sales Officer, Durgapur Sales Area informed the respondent of the suspension of supply with immediate effect. 3.5 The authorities of the appellant(s) conducted Joint Marker Test and the sample failed on such re-test as well. This is evident from the Analysis Report3. 1 ‘Agreement’ 2 ‘Agency’ 3 At page 164 of the paper book 23.6 The authority of the Agency to conduct such collection of samples was questioned by the respondent at the Regional Office of the appellant(s). However, it is alleged that without considering the same Marker Test was conducted on such samples. 3.7 Being aggrieved by the order of suspension of supply, the writ petition which eventually gave rise to the present proceedings was filed. 4. In allowing the writ petition filed on behalf of the present respondent, the Learned Single Judge observed as under:- “…it appears that there are specific provisions under Clause 7 of the aforesaid order of 2005 wherein the Gazetted Officer of both the Central Government and the State Government and also the police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or the authorized officer of the Company itself duly authorized, can take sample and get it tested. But it appears that in the instant case that was not done by the respondent authorities. The aforesaid officers only have the competence to collect the sample and get the same tested. Since the respondents did not follow the aforesaid procedure there is clear violation of the rules and regulation applicable in the cases. xxx xxx xxx In my view, the entire action on the part of the respondent authorities in suspending the supply as well as cancellation of the dealership of the writ petitioner is contrary to law, arbitrary and violative of principle of natural justice…” 35. On appeal, the learned Division Bench relied on the judgment of this Court in Allied Motors Limited v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd4. It was held that the Agency had “absolutely no authority to take samples or to make any seizure of any product” in violation of Clause 7 of the Control Order as also Section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Therefore, it was held that while the appellant(s) had the power to appoint agents for the purposes of administrative convenience, such agents cannot be allowed to flout the provisions of law, which they had in the present case. As such, no reason was found to interfere with the order of the Learned Single Judge and the same was upheld. 6. Hence, the present appeals. 7. We have heard Mr. N. Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General for the appellants, and Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel for the respondent. The submissions made, are recorded briefly as under:- A. Appellant (i) It was submitted that Clause 4 of the Agreement provides that a license was terminable immediately on (a) the termination of the Agreement; (b) breach of any of the terms thereof which are described in Clause 58; 4 (2012) 2 SCC 1 4(ii) The tests conducted by the Agency as also the officials of the appellant(s) found the respondent to be in breach of Clause 58(h), (i), (m); (iii) The appellant(s) found the respondent to have violated in total, five clauses of the Agreement – Clauses 26, 27, 44, 58(i) and (m) and as such the same was terminated; (iv) It was contended that the Agency had the authority to conduct the tests in question as Clause 2.2.2.3 of Marketing Discipline Guidelines5 dated 1st August 2005 issued by the Government of India, provides that apart from oil company officials, mobile labs and ‘agencies authorized by oil companies’ were permitted to draw samples. (v) It was in furtherance of such guidelines that vide Circular dated 3rd November 2006 the Agency was appointed to carry out audits and Market Tests. (vi) The provisions of the Control Order do not apply to the present case as the respondent is not prosecuted for its violation and instead, the Agreement stands terminated for breach of the terms and conditions of the Agreement. 5 MDG 5(vii) It is also submitted that Clause 8 of the Control Order makes clear that there is no bar to appoint an outside agency to conduct the Marker Test. (viii) Reliance is placed on Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v.

--- JUDGMENT 483 ---
B. Respondent (i) The MDG are issued under Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and therefore possess statutory force. The suspension of supply to the respondent was in terms of the aforesaid. It cannot choose to follow only those portions of the law that suit its position. The termination of the Agreement could not be carried out without adhering to the inspection guidelines as per the Control Order. (ii) Clause 39 of the Agreement uses the term “duly authorized representative” which is not defined in the Agreement. The Control Order under Clause 2(b) defines an “authorized officer” and it states that only such a person shall have power of search and seizure as per Clause 7. (iii) As per the quality control measures in Clause 27 of the Agreement, the opinion of the Chief General Manager on the 6 (2019) 19 SCC 662 6contamination of products is slated to be final, however, termination of the respondent’s license was issued by the Senior Regional Manager. (iv) The agreement does not prescribe any procedure for collection of samples, testing or any other procedure of alleged adulteration of products. The Control Order (2005) was preceded by a similar order of 1998 and both would be binding on an oil manufacturing company. As such the procedure mentioned in Clause 7 of the Control Order would be required to be followed. (v) The process of drawing the sample by the agency was improper. The sample collected was in the absence of an authorized officer of the appellant. The blank space for the signatures of ‘OMC Field Officer’ was left blank. (vi) Due to non-compliance with the provisions of the Control Order, the drawing of samples is without basis. (vii) R.M. Service Centre (supra) does not support the case of the appellant. The action sought to be taken by the appellant is penal in nature and therefore, there cannot be two procedures prescribed for the action. A third party cannot be permitted to collect samples in violation of the control order by stating that prosecution has not been launched thereunder and instead prosecuting the dealer for violation of MDG. 7(viii)No power has been conferred upon the oil manufacturing company to bypass the procedure of drawing of samples. Section 100 CrPC was made applicable to ensure the sanctity of the investigation as the outcome thereof could result in penal consequences. Grant of such powers to a third party (agency) would be illegal. (ix) The said judgment does not lay down the correct position in law and non-adherence to the control order would vitiate the entire process. (x) In furtherance of the above submissions, the learned senior counsel for the respondent further relies on Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.7; Hindustan Petroleum Corporation & Ors. v. Super Highway Services & Anr.8; Allied Motors Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation9; and Nazir Ahmad v. The King Emperor10, and certain other decisions.

--- JUDGMENT 484 ---
8. It is necessary to refer to certain Rules, Regulations/provisions of documents for being part of the record to examine the issue in the present lis. For ease of reference, they are extracted hereunder : Provisions of the Agreement and other relevant documents 7 (2003) 2 SCC 107 8 (2010) 3 SCC 321 9 (2012) 2 SCC 1 10 1936 SCC OnLine PC 41 8I. Agreement inter se parties Certain clauses of the agreement between the parties dated 1.2.1997, relevant to the present dispute: “4. The licence and permission granted as aforesaid for the use of the outfit shall terminate immediately on the termination of this Agreement or on any breach of any of the terms thereof. x x x x 26. The dealer shall be responsible for all loss, contamination, damage or shortage of or to the products whether partial or entire, and no claim will be entertained by the corporation therefor under any circumstances except in cases where the corporation is satisfied that loss arose from leakage from underground tanks or pipes which the dealer could not reasonably have discovered and of which the dealer gave immediate notice in writing to the corporation on discovery. Corporation will consider compensation only from the date of receipt of notice till leakage is rectified. 27. All the products supplied by the Corporation to the dealer hereunder shall be in accordance with the specifications laid down by the Corporation from time to time. The dealer shall take every possible precaution against contamination of the corporation’s products by water, dirt or other things injurious to their quality and shall not in any way directly or indirectly alter the specifications of the said products as delivered. The Corporation shall have the right to exercise at its discretion at any time and from time to time quality control measures for products marketed by the corporation and lying with the dealer the opinion of the Chief Regional Manager for the time being at the corporation’s Regional Office at Calcutta as to whether any product of the corporation has been contaminated shall be final and binding upon the dealer, in the event of the said Chief Regional Manager finding that the contamination has been due to any Act or default of the dealer or of his servants or Agents, the corporation shall have the right, without being bound to do so, to remove the contaminated product and to destroy or otherwise deal with the same without making any payment therefor to the dealer and without prejudice to the corporation’s right to terminate this Agreement forthwith. x x x x 39. The Corporation will be entitled to all times to enter into the premises and inspect the management of the retail outlet by the said dealer in all respects and the dealer shall be bound to render all assistance and give all information to the corporation and its duly authorized representatives in that behalf and produce to the corporation 9and/or its duly authorised representatives in that behalf whenever required to do so, receipts, for all payments which it is dealer’s duty to make whether under the terms of this agreement or otherwise. x x x x 44. The dealer undertakes faithfully and promptly to carry out, observe and perform all dir4ections, or rules given or made from time to time by the corporation for the proper carrying on of the dealership of the corporation. The dealer shall scrupulously observe and comply with all laws, rules regulations and requisitions of the central/state government and of all authorities appointed by them or either of them including in particular the chief controller of explosives, government of India, and/or municipal and/or any other local authority with regard to the storage and sale of such petroleum products. x x x x 58. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, the Corporation shall also be at liberty to terminate this Agreement forthwith on or at any time after the happening of any of the following events, namely : x x x x H) If the dealer does not adhere to the instructions issued from time to time by the corporation in connection with safe practices to be followed by him in the supply/storage of the Corporation’s products or otherwise. I) If the dealer shall contaminate or tamper with the quality of any of the products supplied by the Corporation. M) If the dealer shall either by himself or by his servants or agents commit or suffer to be committed any act, in the opinion of the Chief Regional Manager of the Corporation on the time being at Calcutta whose decision shall be final, is prejudicial to the interest or good name of the Corporation or its products the Chief Regional Manager shall not be bound to give reason for such decision.” II. The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply, Distributor and Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 2005 “2. Definitions - in this order, unless the context otherwise requires: (a) "adulteration" means " [presence of marker in motor spirit and high speed diesel and/or] the introduction of any foreign substance into motor spirit or high speed diesel illegally or 10unauthorisedly with the result that the product does not conform to the requirements of the Bureau of Indian Standards specifications number IS 2796 and IS 1460 for motor spirit and high speed diesel respectively or any other requirement notified by the Central Government from time to time; (b) "authorized officer" means an officer authorized under the provisions of clause 7;” x x x x x “7. Power of search and seizure - (1) any Gazette Officer of the Central Government or a State Government or any Police Officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police duly authorized, by general or special order of the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, or any officer of the oil company, not below the rank of sales officer, may, with a view to securing compliance with the provisions of this Order, or for the purpose of satisfying himself that this Order or any order made thereunder has been complied with or there is reason to believe that all or any of the provisions of this Order have been and are being or are about to be contravened, - (a) enter and search any place or premises of a dealer, transporter, consumer or any other person who is an employee or agent of such dealer or transporter or consumer; (b) stop and search any person or vehicle or receptacle used or intended to be used for movement of the product; (c) take samples of the product and seize any of the stocks of the product and the vehicle or receptacle or any other conveyance used or suspected to be used for carrying such stocks and thereafter take or authorize the taking all measures necessary for securing the production of stocks or items so seized before the Collector or District Magistrate having jurisdiction under the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and for their safe custody pending such production; (d) inspect, seize and remove with, such aid or assistance as may be necessary, books, registers, any other records or documents of the dealer, transporter, consumer or any other person suspected to be an employee or agent of the dealer, transporter or consumer; (2) While exercising the power of seizure provided under sub- clauses (c) and (d) above, the authorized officer shall record in writing the reasons for doing so and a copy of such recording shall 11be provided to the dealer, transporter, consumer or any other concerned person, as the case may be. (3) The provisions of S. 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search and seizure shall, as far as may be, apply to searches and seizures under this Order. III. Marketing discipline guidelines, 2005 “Chapter – 2 INDUSTRY GUIDELINES FOR SAMPLE COLLECTION AND TESTING (3-TIER) SAMPLING SYSTEM) x x x x x 2.2.2 AT RETAIL OUTLETS At the Retail outlets, samples are required to be drawn by the following : 2.2.2.1 By the dealer/his representative on receipt of each supply through tank lories at the retain outlet. 2.2.2.2 Oil companies have to draws the samples from all tanks of retail outlets as given below : a) From 1% of total No. of retail outlets under each divisions/controlling office every month till 31.12.05. b) From 10% p.m. of the total number of retail outlets w.e.f. 01.01.2006 which will be progressively increased to 20% p.m. from 01.01.2007 and 50% p.m.

--- JUDGMENT 485 ---
from 01.01.2008. 2.2.2.3 Persons/agencies authorized to draws samples are : Oil company officials Mobil labs Agencies authorized by oil companies. However, in case of stock variation beyond permissible limits, density, failure, filter paper test failure and during special drives/campaigns or in case of specific complaint against the retail outlets. Company officials are to draw samples and forward them for testing as per laid down procedure. 12Samples are to be drawn from nozzle (s) of the dispensing units from all tanks of both MS and HSD by the persons/agencies as referred above. All the inspecting officials shall bring their own aluminum containers for drawing samples. They will pay the cost of samples collected by them and obtain cash memo for the same.” Consideration and Conclusion 9. As we have referred to earlier, the appellant(s) have placed strong reliance on the judgment of this Court in R.M. Service Centre (supra). The relevant extracts are as under:- “14. The first issue required to be examined is whether the appellants were required to follow the procedure under the Control Order read with Section 100 of the Code. The Control Order has been issued under Section 3 of the Act. Such Act has been enacted for control of the production, supply and distribution and trade and commerce, of certain commodities. In respect of high speed diesel and motor spirit, the Control Order is issued for regulation of supply and distribution and prevention of the malpractices. Section 6-A of the Act provides for confiscation of the essential commodity whereas, Section 7 of the Act makes any person who contravenes any order made under Section 3 liable for criminal prosecution. Therefore, we find that the effect of issuance of the Control Order is that in the event of violation of such Control Order, any person who contravenes any order made under Section 3 of the Act i.e. the Control Order, he is liable to be punished by a court. Therefore, the violation of the Control Order has penal consequences leading to conviction. The provisions of search and seizure contained in Clause 7 read with Section 100 of the Code will come into play only in the event a person is sought to be prosecuted for violation of the provisions of the Control Order. Admittedly, in the present case, the dealer is not sought to be prosecuted for the violation of the Guidelines, therefore, the procedure for drawing of samples which is a necessary precondition under the Control Order for prosecuting an offender does not arise for consideration. 15. The dealer has entered into an agreement on 20-12-1995. It is not disputed that the dealer is bound by the Guidelines issued by the Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies. Clause 2.4.4 of the Guidelines provides for procedure for drawing of samples. Note (2) 13provides that the samples drawn should reach the laboratory for testing “preferably within ten days of the collection of the samples”. Similarly, sub-clause (A) of Clause 2.5 of the Guidelines provides that all samples should be suitably coded before sending them to the laboratory for testing “preferably” within ten days of drawing the samples. Sub-clause (I) of Clause 2.5 of the Guidelines is that the purpose of mentioning time-frame for various activities such as sending samples to the laboratory preferably within ten days is to streamline the system and is in no way related to quality/result of the product. In view of the language of the Guidelines, the findings recorded by the High Court that the timeline is to be strictly adhered to cannot be sustained. 16. The Guidelines as mentioned in sub-clause (I) of Clause 2.5 of the Guidelines is to streamline the functioning i.e. the oil companies should not arbitrarily or without any justification send the sample for testing at their sweet will. ….” 10. What falls from the extract quoted above is that any person who contravenes the Control Order is liable to be punished by the Court. Therefore, for a person to be prosecuted for violating the provisions relating to search and seizure contained in Clause (7) thereof, such a person will have to be brought to the book, particularly, for having violated the said Control Order. 11. In contrast, as has been submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants, the respondent was sought to be prosecuted only for the violation of the terms of the agreement inter se the parties and not for any other alleged violation, if any.11 12. Keeping in view the aforesaid, the submission of the respondents that R.M. Service Centre (supra) does not aid the case of the appellants, 11 Page 2 of written submission of the appellants 14cannot be accepted. As already noticed above, the respondent has not been prosecuted for violation of the Control Order. Reliance on Allied Motors (supra) in our considered opinion, does not help the case of the respondent, for therein, what was alleged and ultimately held proved that the dealership was terminated without a show cause notice and in violation of principles of natural justice. That is not the pleaded case of the respondent herein.

--- JUDGMENT 486 ---
13. In Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited & Ors. v. Super Highway Services & Anr.12 this Court observed as under : “31. The cancellation of dealership agreement of a party is a serious business and cannot be taken lightly. In order to justify the action taken to terminate such an agreement, the authority concerned has to act fairly and in complete adherence to the rules/guidelines framed for the said purpose. The non-service of notice to the aggrieved person before the termination of his dealership agreement also offends the well- established principle that no person should be condemned unheard. It was the duty of the petitioner to ensure that Respondent 1 was given a hearing or at least serious attempts were made to serve him with notice of the proceedings before terminating his agreement. x x x x x 33. The guidelines being followed by the Corporation require that the dealer should be given prior notice regarding the test so that he or his representative also can be present when the test is conducted. The said requirement is in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the need for fairness in the matter of terminating the dealership agreement and it cannot be made an empty formality. Notice should be served on the dealer sufficiently early so as to give him adequate time and opportunity to arrange for his presence during the test and there should be admissible evidence for such service of notice on the dealer. Strict adherence to the above requirement is essential, in view of the possibility of manipulation in the conduct of the test, if it is conducted behind the back of the dealer.” 12 (2010) 3 SCC 321 1514. The crux of the above decision is that when a dealership agreement is to be cancelled, it has to be so done strictly in consonance with Rules/Guidelines framed in that regard. When a sampling test is being conducted a dealer is to be given prior notice so as to ensure his or his representative’s presence can be secured. In the present facts, the respondents have taken issue with the process of collection of samples, being aggrieved by the fact that a third party, namely, SGS India was appointed to take samples and not with the lack of service of notice or any other such non-compliance of the principles of natural justice as discussed in the said judgment. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 487 ---
2024 INSC 461 REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No.406 OF 2013 IN RE- INHUMAN CONDITIONS IN 1382 PRISONS O R D E R (I) CONTEXT 1. Pursuant to our order dated 23rd April, 2024, Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned Amicus Curiae1 has filed a Note summarising details of information2 received from the States of Bihar, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Odisha, and Kerala. 2. The AC submits that the State of Uttar Pradesh has also filed a report which runs into more than 300 pages; likewise stands the position for the States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh – all their reports/responses are voluminous. Mr. Agrawal submits that these three States (supra) may file additional affidavits in terms of the order dated 23rd April, 2024, for which purpose some time be granted. 3. It is also submitted that further affidavits have been received from the States of Telangana, Assam, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. He requests for time to file a comprehensive report after going through the said affidavits. 1 hereinafter referred to as the ‘AC’ 2 hereinafter referred to as the ‘Note’ Page 1 of 17(II) STATEWISE STUTUS REPORTS (A) STATE OF BIHAR 4. Onto what engages us today, the AC draws the attention of this Court to the State of Bihar, where overcrowding in jails has been flagged, especially concerning the (a) District Jails at (i) Aurangabad, (ii) Darbhanga, (iii) Gopalganj, (iv) Khagaria, (v) Lakhisarai, (vi) Madhepura, (vii) Biharsharif, (viii) Navadah, (ix) Saharsa, (x) Chapra, (xi) Sitamarhi, (xii) Siwan, (xiii) Supaul, (xiv) Hajipur; (b) Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, and (c) Central Jail, Purnea. 5.

--- JUDGMENT 488 ---
6. This Court is not satisfied with the steps taken by the concerned authorities of the State of Bihar to indicate their seriousness towards addressing issues which are urgent in nature and cannot be casually dealt with. For instance, apropos improvement in living conditions for the prisoners in Central Jail, Gaya, it transpires that that approval has been given for making adequate availability of drainage facility, construction of additional toilets, construction of kitchen, in the current Financial Year followed by construction over the next two years. 7. For the Sub-Jail, Sherghati, approval has been given for construction of 15 additional toilets and the work is being done by the Building Construction Department. Page 2 of 178. The AC has submitted that in terms of the recommendations made by the Committee constituted by this Court, in 13 Central/ District Jails, insofar as women prisoners are concerned, the State Government has indicated various steps taken in the District Jails at Aurangabad, Ara, Katihar, Lakhisarai, and the Central Jail at Gaya. 9. Again, we would note that though some recommendations made by the Committee have been accepted/processed, the State Government is yet in the process of granting approvals for construction of kitchen, increasing the height of the parameter wall as also for construction/maintenance of clean toilets, separate women prisoners’ hospital, expansion of women prison-wards and barracks and construction of new prisoner cells. We find no valid reason for the delays in the approvals. Needless to state, the approval, being the starting point for any project/development to proceed, it must be dealt with on priority. The Note and the record make it clear that for various jails, approvals for the works are expected to be given in the present Financial Year 2024-25 i.e. in the next 10 months, upto March, 2025. 10. In the above background, the AC has prayed for issuance of directions as under: ‘a) Approval for additional wards in District Jail Aurangabad, District Jail Lakhisarai and District Jail Nawadah, and the 5 women jails mentioned above may be expedited by the State Government so that process for construction can begin at the earliest. The Government has stated that the financial approval would be given in this financial year.

--- JUDGMENT 489 ---
The Government may consider giving approval in 3 months' time and take further steps thereafter. b) It is important that with the increase in the capacity, the State Government may also be directed to ensure that other necessary infrastructure like sanitation facility, kitchen, staff etc is also upgraded to meet the additional needs. c) Construction is going on in District Jail Darbhanga, Central Jail Purnea, District Jail Saharsa and District Jail Chhapra. Affidavit of the State Government states that most of the works would be completed by next year Page 3 of 17i.e. 2025. The Chief Secretary, State of Bihar may take a review meeting of the ongoing construction in 6 months' time to ensure that there is no delay in the said construction. d) Land identification process is underway interalia in Gopalganj, Khagaria, Biharsharif and few other districts. It is humbly prayed that the Chief Secretary may review the matter in 4 months. He may impress upon the District Magistrates of the urgency, so that land is identified at the earliest. The progress in this regard may be informed to this Hon'ble Court. e) It appears that land has been selected for construction of new jail in Madhepura. Madhepura has huge overcrowding in as much as sanctioned capacity is 182 and existing capacity is 517 i.e. 2.5 times the sanctioned capacity. It is prayed that the State Government may be directed to complete the land acquisition process within 6 months. f) A new jail is proposed in Supaul for which estimate has been received from Building Construction Department and process of approval is underway. The State Government may be directed to expedite approval process so that construction process can begin.’ 11. The AC has also highlighted additional issues: ‘… The undersigned has gone through the summary of the report and respectful submits that the following may need the attention of the State Government:- Sr. Name of jail Report of the Committee No. 1 District Jail Facilities for children lodged with Begusarai their mothers in jail:- There is women's cell of 10 capacity located in the prison currently have 37 women prisons with one child are living. A temporary crèche facility is available in the women's sections. District Education Officer/ District Programme Officer Begusarai have been requested to open an Anganwari Center in the women's wing of the jail for the primary education of the children of 0-6 years confined with female prisoners. Page 4 of 17There is lack of space inside the jail for construction of addition male cell.

--- JUDGMENT 490 ---
As the number of prisoners increases, a situation of public unrest arise. Keeping in mind the density of prisoners, there seems to be a need for construction of a sub-jail inside the district. The Committee unanimously decided to recommend for construction of a sub-jail inside the District between Manjhaul Sub-Division and Bakhri Sub- Division. 2 Central Jail Construction of toilet cum Bhagalpur/ bathroom with 10 commodes is Women District Jail required in Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur Bhagalpur for the purpose of female prisoners. There is a need to construct double washing closets (toilets, urinals) inside the wards in Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur as per Model Jail Manual, 2016, which is not available in the jail. At present, the provision of flush toilet is not available in Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur. According to the Model Jail Manual, 2016, all the previously constructed toilets are required to be converted into flush toilets and the previously non- functional toilets in the jail are required to be repaired and renovated. At present, there is a provision of one washroom for every 10 Page 5 of 17prisoners in Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur, but it needs repair/ renovation. Presently, modern kitchen is not installed in Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur. As a result, as per Model Jail Manual, 2016, additional modern kitchen is expected to be installed as per the prison capacity. 3 Central Jail Buxar On the point of welfare of women prisoners and facilities for children lodged with their mother in jails, the Jail Superintendent stated that construction of canteen, crèche, toilets and bathrooms, advanced kitchen of women is required. 4 District Patna Patna has Adarsh Central Beur, District Jail Phulwarisharif and 4 sub jails. However, there is no report regarding the requirements of the said jails. 5 District Jail Rohtas One female ward is needed for (Sasaram) the women inmates during the meeting, Jail Superintendent [As against capacity submitted that place is available of 30 women for enhancing the capacity of prisoners, there are existing jail. 82 women prisoners lodged in jail]. 6 District Jail For the treatment of women Samastipur inmates service of one Gynaecologist (sic) is required at least once in a week. Hence, Jail Superintendent is directed to communicate the matter to Civil Surgeon, Samastipur for the arrangement of one Gynaecologist (sic). It is also recommended by the Page 6 of 17Committee that any child between age 4-6 years, who is living with his/her mother, he/she will be enrolled to the nearest school for proper education.

--- JUDGMENT 491 ---
…’ 12. From the aforesaid, it transpires that no specific report regarding requirements for the Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Phulwarisharif and 4 Sub-jails of the said jails, has been furnished. 13. Ergo, on the recommendation of the AC, a direction is hereby issued to the State of Bihar not only to implement on priority basis, the recommendations supra but further, to ensure that the exercise contemplated is undertaken on an urgent basis for all the jails in its jurisdiction. Milestones be fixed for expeditious implementation/completion thereof. The State will also endeavour to shorten the timelines presently projected for various works. Fresh affidavit of compliance shall be filed by the State of Bihar before the next date. (B) STATE OF PUNJAB 14. The AC’s Note highlights overcrowding in jails and points out some timelines for infrastructural improvement in jails and their upgradation. Four five-year phases have been indicated viz. from (a) 2024-2025 to 2028-2029, (b) 2029-2030 to 2033-2034, (c) 2034-2035 to 2038-2039, and (d) 2039-2040 to 2043-2044. For the first phase comprising the Financial Years 2024-2025 to 2028-2029, the Central Jails at Patiala, Ludhiana, Amritsar, Kapurthala, Faridkot; District Jails at Nabha, Sangrur, Roopnagar, Page 7 of 17Mansa, Barnala and Sub-Jail, Fazilka have been included detailing works qua repair, other constructions including sewage systems, new barracks, repair of hospital cells, bathrooms, creation of female barracks, creche etc. 15.

--- JUDGMENT 492 ---
For the State of Punjab, the AC seeks the following directions: ‘i) It is humbly submitted that the Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab has merely mentioned that summary is submitted. It is hoped that the Government has decided the recommendations. It is imperative that actual decisions are taken by the State Government in this regard and atleast (sic) the works that can be approved in this financial year 2024-25 are approved in 3 months' time. The Government must try and approve as many projects/ works as possible. ii) Construction of additional capacity should also be matched with other infrastructure like construction of toilets, enhancement of staff etc. This aspect should also be examined by the State. iii) On the last date, this Hon'ble Court had indicated about need for de- addiction center in atleast (sic) major jails in the State of Punjab. Only recommendation is given qua Central Jail Faridkot that there is a requirement for de-addiction center. It is important that the State of Punjab examines the availability of medical facilities which are required in all Central Jails atleast (sic) for purposes of de-addiction center. iv) With regard to women prisoners: The State Government has mentioned in its affidavit that the Department of Jail will establish sanitary pad dispensing and disposal machine at Central Jail Ferozepur as recommended by the Dis- trict Committee. It is humbly submitted that the State Government may exam- ine whether similar such facility is required and can be made available in other Central Jails also.’ 16. The State of Punjab through its authorities concerned is directed to do the needful in the above terms and file a fresh affidavit well before the next date of hearing. (C) STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 17. The Note, as per the Statement of the Director General, Prisons, indicates that the total capacity of the 33 jails in the State is 14483, whereas currently 18343 prisoners are lodged. The Statement informs that construction work of 78 prisoner barracks is Page 8 of 17being undertaken to increase the capacity to 4450. 26 works would be completed by December, 2024; 40 works by June 2025, and the remaining works by December, 2025. It is stated that for ensuring that there is no overcrowding in jails for the next 10 years, action will be taken on a proposal of ₹ 22.8 crores for construction of 19 additional prisoner barracks, which would further boost the capacity by 1900. Provision thereof would be made in the Budget of the next Financial Year and the work would be completed by December, 2026. 18. With regard to the welfare of women prisoners and children in the prison, the Note sets out that the State’s position is that overcrowding would be solved by completion of the already-sanctioned barracks as also barracks to be sanctioned in the coming Financial Year. It is said that free sanitary pads are being provided to the women prisoners and an incinerator machine has also been installed for their disposal. It is informed that adequate arrangements for toilets and bathrooms in the women’s cells and for night toilets in the barracks has been made, to handle cleanliness and hygiene. The State submits that adequate water facilities are in place. For children living with female prisoners, who are detained in jail, it is stated that nutritious food, clothes and medical facilities as per the relevant jail rules are being provided. Babies are provided clothes, food and milk on the advice of the doctor. Baby-kit clothes, soap, oil, powder, mosquito net, rexine, etc., are being given for new-born baby/ies. A crèche has been arranged in the jails for children. Children above the age of six years, who do not have any guardian, are kept in a Children’s Home, with permission from the concerned District Magistrate. It Page 9 of 17is informed that the Children’s Home is equipped for the intellectual and physical development of the children.

--- JUDGMENT 493 ---
19. The AC has submitted that construction in the existing barracks would ease the overcrowding to some extent, but the affidavit of the Chief Secretary/Note of the Director General, Prisons does not deal with the recommendations of the Committee regarding each of the 16 Central and District Jails. The AC points out that administrative approval in many cases is pending such as construction of a special jail with capacity of 4000 prisoners in Raipur District, acquisition of land in Village Deori, approval for new jails in Balrampur etc. 20. The AC seeks following directions: ‘a) The Government may examine the specific recommendations qua 16 central/ district jails as highlighted in the note of the undersigned and examine whether the additional construction of barracks would ease of overcrowding in that jail. The problem of overcrowding must be seen at jail level and not for the entire State as a whole. b) The additional capacity should be matched with other infrastructure like toilets and enhancement of staff. This aspect should also be examined by the State. c) It has been mentioned that 19 additional prison barracks of 100 each would be approved in this financial year. It is prayed that the State Government may be directed to approve the said proposals within a period of 3 months so that construction could began. d) The report of the Committee constituted by this Hon'ble Court qua women prisoners and children is not available. It is submitted that the said report may be made available to the undersigned so that the problems can be highlighted and the recommendations can be brought to the notice of this Hon'ble Court.’ 21. Directions are issued to the State of Chhattisgarh on the above terms and com- pliance report be filed on an affidavit before the next date of hearing. Page 10 of 17STATE OF RAJASTHAN 22. The Note by the AC states that 30 works relating to construction of jails are on- going, including construction of District Jail Dungarpur, which is likely to be completed by 31st August, 2024, construction of prison barracks in Sub-Jail Kishangarh, District Jail Barmer, Central Jail Sriganganagar, District Jail Nagaur, District Jail Churu, Central Jail Kota and District Jail Jhunjhunu. Similarly, reconstruction of open jail quarters in various jails including Central Jail Kota and District Jail Barmer, most of the works are scheduled to be completed either in the present calendar year or at the latest, by March, 2025. 23. As far as the reports of the Committee constituted by this Court are concerned, para 8 of the Chief Secretary’s affidavit reads as under: ‘The recommendations of the Committee formed under the chairmanship of the Hon'ble District and Sessions Judges were examined and the following land has been allotted for prisons- 1. Sub Jail Bari (Dholpur) 2. Sub Jail Hindaun City 3. District Jail Bhilwara 4. Sub Jail Phalodi 5. Sub Jail Choti Sadri 6. District Jail Rajsamand 7. Sub Jail Bheem 8. Sub Jail Ramganjmand 9. Sub Jail Nainwa 10. Sub Jail Bhawanimandi’ 24. The State Government has stated that various requests for sanction of money and identification of suitable land for expansion would be done in the coming months.

--- JUDGMENT 494 ---
25. The AC, in praesenti, does not seek any positive directions to the authorities concerned. However, the AC submits that the timelines be adhered to, both for works in Page 11 of 17progress as also for analysing new proposals. The State is directed to take note of the afore-stated and proceed accordingly. (D) STATE OF JHARKHAND 26. Various recommendations made by the Committee for the 14 Jails (Central/District) have been indicated. It has been stated that pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, the Government has written to all the Prison Superintendents to seek preparation of estimates from the Jharkhand Police Housing Corporation Limited3 for the works recommended. The State Government has sought information wherever new prisons have been recommended for establishment. 27. The AC has sought directions as under: ‘i) There is urgent need for construction of new jail in Deogarh for which part of the land is also acquired and another part of the land has been earmarked. The Chief Secretary of the State should ensure that necessary steps are taken for process of the construction of new Jail at Deogarh and submit a status report to this Hon'ble Court. ii) As regards other jails are concerned, the State has directed the Superintendent of all jails to get estimates for construction of new wards and/or renovation. It may be (sic) admissible if this process is completed as soon as possible so that the requirement in each of the jails is ascertained as soon as possible and those works which can be started this year can commence at the earliest. iii) The Superintendent of women jails/wards in the State can also examine specific issues dealing with hygiene, sanitation and medical checkup of women and also the facility required for children and communicate the same as soon as possible to the Headquarter for doing the needful.’ 28. At this stage, the Court would indicate that the State does not appear serious in taking immediate remedial measures in the matter inasmuch as it has left it to the Prison Superintendents to prepare/obtain estimates for the works recommended with the aid of 3 hereinafter referred to as ‘JPHCL’ Page 12 of 17JPHCL. The Prison Superintendent, being the junior-most officer in the hierarchy, cannot be expected to have much of a say, real or persuasive, to get things done at the higher/highest level. With this in mind, this Court had earlier indicated that the Chief Secretaries of the States/Union Territories would be filing affidavits, with the idea so that all the recommendations could be scrutinised at the highest level, and consequently, whatever action would be required, could be taken by the State Government, eliminating any processual delays. 29.

--- JUDGMENT 495 ---
The State shall act in terms of the directions sought by the AC, being mindful of what we have penned above. (E) STATE OF ODISHA 30. The AC’s Note indicates that the affidavit filed by the Chief Secretary is not clear on one aspect - the Chief Secretary has forwarded minutes of meetings of the Committees of 13 Districts, whereas there are 30 Districts in the State of Odisha. It is not clear if the remaining Districts (17) have held their meetings, and if yes, what report/recommendation(s) have been made. To address the problem of overcrowding in 8 jails, inter alia, additional wards have been constructed in 29 selected jails enhancing the total capacity of inmates by 2240 during the years 2020-2021, 2021-2022 and 2022- 2023. It is stated that additional wards are also under construction in 23 jails, which would enhance the inmate capacity by 1625. Page 13 of 1731. For five districts, namely, Nabarangpur, Kandhamal Phulbani, Doegarh, Gajapati and Sundergarh, for which recommendations have been made by the Committee concerned, there is nothing to indicate as to what action has been taken on the same. 32. The State is directed to proceed with all possible expedition to ramp up the capacity and file a fresh affidavit before the next date. (F) STATE OF KERALA 33. The affidavit by the Chief Secretary indicates overcrowding issues in 13 prisons4. Recommendations have also been made by the Committees. Yet, nothing concrete is forthcoming as to what follow-up action, if any, has been taken by the State Government. As such, the AC has prayed for issuance of these directions: ‘a) In some of the Districts in the State of Kerala, the 1st meeting was adjourned awaiting reports from the Superintendent of Prisons. It is therefore, humbly prayed that in such cases, a 2nd meeting may be held and recommendations to improve the conditions in the prison may be made. b) The State of Kerala may be directed to examine the recommenda- tions made by the Committees in all the districts and take appropriate de- cisions prioritizing the cases which are urgent and which need immediate action and compliance affidavits may be filed before the next date of hear- ing.’ 34. The State is directed to act in terms of the AC’s prayers extracted above and file a compliance affidavit before the next date. (III) WAY FORWARD 35. Upon careful consideration of the stands taken by the States supra as also the oral submissions of various other States made through their respective learned counsel, 4 For reference, the State of Kerala has 56 prisons. Page 14 of 17we are constrained to observe that the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations have not fully woken up to the dire situation. Bereft of a sense of urgency, we sense a certain lethargy. It is most unfortunate that upon queries put by the Court to the learned counsel appearing for the States, the standard response received is that further time be given to come up with details. Obviously, learned counsel cannot address the Court without instructions. 36. There has been a detailed dialogue between the Court, the AC and the learned counsel, during the hearing. Many aspects and factors have been clarified to learned counsel appearing for the parties. We presume that learned counsel, having taken note of the same, would impress upon their respective clients i.e. the respective States or Union Territories (hereinafter referred to as ‘UT’) to act with diligence. Ex consequenti, we direct that appropriate response(s) shall be filed by way of additional affidavits personally affirmed by the Chief Secretary of the State/UT concerned, at least a week before the next date of hearing, of course, with advance copies to the AC. 37. In addition to specific directions issued to certain States, it is categorically indicated that pending approval(s), be it for sanction of projects or identification of suitable land, the same be proceeded with and brought to their logical conclusion by the States/UTs within a period of ten weeks, reckoned from today. 38. Few learned counsel have requested that the Court may specify some common/ uniform parameters for States/UTs to create facilities in prisons. This suggestion is mer- ited. To begin with, specifications/parameters for jails may be in terms prescribed by and Page 15 of 17under the Model Prison Manual 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MPM’) issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs. 39. Learned Senior counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh has submitted that as per the parameters in its latest Jail Manual5, the average area per prisoner is more than what is provided for in the MPM. It is canvassed that if the MPM specification is applied, then the capacity of prisons in Uttar Pradesh would increase substantially, with the current infrastructure alone. 40. We may note that perhaps mere existence of a large campus area would not per se mean that the capacity has been enhanced or augmented. What is required to be seen is that whether the requisite facilities for each individual prisoner are adequate in terms of sleeping area, mobility within the prison, kitchen/food, health facilities, other matters etc. 41. Thus, States/UTs, in their proposed affidavits, should address all issues holistically, including inmate-capacity enhancement/augmentation. Other logistics such as creation of posts of wardens/cooks/doctors/various jail staff etc. should also be factored in.

--- JUDGMENT 496 ---
42. Before concluding, we may reiterate that prisoners are covered under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In Sunil Batra (II) v Delhi Administration6, this Court had pointedly answered that prisoners are persons who are entitled to Fundamental Rights even while in custody. Rama Murthy v State of Karnataka7, was a case where 5 We take it that the reference is to the Uttar Pradesh Jail Manual, 2022. 6 (1980) 3 SCC 488 7 (1997) 3 SCC 642 Page 16 of 17this Court had identified some problems plaguing jails in India, some of which continue to linger till today. Even before these cases, the view of this Court in respect of prisoners and undertrials was exposited in State of Maharashtra v Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri8 and Mohan Patnaik v State of Andhra Pradesh9. These are merely illustrative but sufficient to demonstrate the intent of this Court to secure basic facilities for those housed in prisons and were noticed in Orders/Judgment passed in this writ petition reported as (2016) 3 SCC 70010, (2016) 10 SCC 1711, (2017) 10 SCC 65812, and (2018) 18 SCC 77713. We expect all stakeholders to rise to the occasion and discharge the obligation cast on them as expeditiously as is possible.

--- JUDGMENT 497 ---
CA 6351/2024 2024 INSC 415 Reportable IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No 6351 of 2024 (Arising out of SLP (C) No 10492 of 2023) Dharnidhar Mishra (D) and Another Appellants Versus State of Bihar and Others Respondents O R D E R 1 Application for substitution to bring on record the legal heirs of the first petitioner is allowed. Cause title be amended accordingly. 2 Leave granted. 3 This appeal arises from a order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna dated 7 February 2023 in the Letters Patent Appeal No 997 of 2019 in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No 8408 of 2019 by which the Division Bench of the High Court disposed of the Letters Patent Appeal by asking the appellant herein to file an appropriate application before the concerned authority for disbursement of the value of the land assessed at Rs 4,68,099. 1CA 6351/2024 4 The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under: In the year 1976, a notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act was issued for the purpose of construction of State Highway as notified by the State of Bihar. The land owned by the appellant herein was included in Section 4 notification referred to above. Sometime in 1977, the land of the appellant was acquired. However, it is the case of the appellant that not a single penny was paid to him towards compensation. 5 The appellant preferred an appropriate application addressed to the State Government immediately after his land came to be acquired and possession was taken over in the year 1977 for payment of compensation. It is the case of the appellant that State did not even pass any award of compensation and kept the matter in limbo. 6 Years passed by and the appellant kept on requesting the authorities to pass an appropriate award and pay the amount towards compensation. 7 As the respondents did not pay heed to the say of the appellant, he was left with no other option but to file a writ petition in the High Court of Patna. The writ petition was heard by a learned Single Judge and by order dated 19 July 2019 rejected the same only on the count that the petition had been filed after a period of forty-two years of the acquisition. While dismissing the writ petition, the learned Single Judge also observed that the appellant had failed to submit any paper or notification in connection with acquisition of his land 2CA 6351/2024 for the purpose of payment of compensation. 8 Being dissatisfied with the order passed by the learned Single Judge rejecting his writ petition, the appellant went in appeal. The appeal came to be disposed of by a Division Bench in the following terms: “A hard copy of the supplementary affidavit on behalf of the State has been filed across the Board. Let it be taken on record. In view of the categorical stand of the State that the land of the appellants had been consumed and that the State is ready to compensate the appellants, nothing remains in this appeal to be decided. The appellants have been informed about the value of the land has been assessed at Rs 4,68,099/- . All that the appellants have to do is to file an application before the concerned authority as to how the amount shall be apportioned between him and his son. It is expected that the decision in that regard by the State Authority shall be taken without any delay as already the matter has become five decades old. The appeal stands disposed of." 9 Mr. Dharnidhar Jha, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the State conceded to the fact that the land of the appellant had been acquired and was put to use for the purpose the same was acquired. He would submit that if the State thought fit to acquire the land of his client, then it was obligatory on the part of the State to pass an appropriate award determining the amount towards compensation. He would 3CA 6351/2024 submit that it is not the case that the appellant herein was lethargic in asserting his rights, but rather kept on requesting the authorities concerned to determine the amount towards compensation and pay the same. 10 On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the State of Bihar submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order. He would submit that it is not in dispute that the land of the appellant was acquired for a public purpose, but at the same time, it was the duty of the appellant to pursue the matter further for the purpose of getting appropriate compensation determined in accordance with law. 11 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in passing the impugned order. 12 We take notice of the fact that the Single Judge of the High Court thought fit to reject the writ petition only on the ground of delay and in appeal, the appellate court disposed of the appeal asking the appellant herein to file an application before the concerned authority for disbursement of the amount of compensation. 13 We take notice of two things: First, the High Court in its impugned order has stated that the appellant herein has been informed about the value of the 4CA 6351/2024 land assessed at Rs 4,68,099. We fail to understand on what basis this figure has been arrived at; at what point of time this amount came to be assessed; and the basis for the assessment of such amount. Secondly, the order of the High Court could be said to be a non-speaking order. Although at this stage, the learned counsel appearing for the State of Bihar submitted that it was an order obtained with the consent of the parties, yet there is nothing to indicate that any consent was given by the appellant herein to pass such an order. 14 The first thing that the High Court should have enquired with the State is as to why in the year 1977 itself, that is the year in which the land came to be acquired, the award for compensation was not passed. The High Court should have enquired why it took forty-two years for the State to determine the figure of Rs 4,68,099. The High Court should also have asked the State the basis of the determination of the amount towards compensation. It is a well settled position of law that after the award towards compensation is passed, if the owner of the land is not satisfied with the quantum, he can even file an appeal for the enhancement of the same. The High Court proceeded on the footing that the amount of Rs 4,68,099 has been assessed and it is now for the appellant to file an appropriate application and get the amount disbursed in his favour. 15 We are not convinced but rather disappointed with the approach of the High Court while disposing of the appeal. 5CA 6351/2024 16 There are many issues arising in this litigation and the High Court should have taken little pains to ask the State why it made the appellant run from pillar to post. It is sad to note that the appellant passed away fighting for his right to receive compensation. Now the legal heirs of the appellant are pursuing this litigation. 17 In 1976, when the land of the appellant came to be acquired the right to property was a fundamental right guaranteed by Article 31 in Part III of the Constitution. Article 31 guaranteed the right to private property, which could not be deprived without due process of law and upon just and fair compensation. 18 The right to property ceased to be a fundamental right by the Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, however, it continued to be a human right in a welfare State, and a constitutional right under Article 300-A of the Constitution. Article 300-A provides that no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. The State cannot dispossess a citizen of his property except in accordance with the procedure established by law. The obligation to pay compensation, though not expressly included in Article 300- A, can be inferred in that Article. [See: K.T.

--- JUDGMENT 498 ---
State of U.P. reported in (2011) 9 SCC 354, this Court recognised the right to property as a basic human right in the following words: “30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different political thinkers that some amount of property right is an indispensable safeguard against tyranny and economic oppression of the Government. Jefferson was of the view that liberty cannot long subsist without the support of property. “Property must be secured, else liberty cannot subsist” was the opinion of John Adams. Indeed the view that property itself is the seed-bed which must be conserved if other constitutional values are to flourish, is the consensus among political thinkers and jurists.” (Emphasis supplied) 22 In Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat reported in 1995 Supp (1) SCC 596, this Court held as follows: 7CA 6351/2024 “48. … In other words, Article 300-A only limits the powers of the State that no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. There has to be no deprivation without any sanction of law. Deprivation by any other mode is not acquisition or taking possession under Article 300-A. In other words, if there is no law, there is no deprivation.” (Emphasis supplied) 23 In Tukaram Kana Joshi v. MIDC reported in (2013) 1 SCC 353, this Court held that the State must comply with the procedure for acquisition, requisition, or any other permissible statutory mode. The State being a welfare State governed by the rule of law cannot arrogate to itself a status beyond what is provided by the Constitution. 24 This Court in State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar reported in (2011) 10 SCC 404 held that the right to property is now considered to be not only a constitutional or statutory right, but also a human right. Human rights have been considered in the realm of individual rights such as right to shelter, livelihood, health, employment, etc. Human rights have gained a multi- faceted dimension. 25 We regret to state that the learned Single Judge of the High Court did not deem fit even to enquire with the State whether just and fair compensation was paid to the appellant or not. The learned Single Judge rejected the writ petition only on the ground of delay. As held by this court in Vidya Devi v. The State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. reported in (2020) 2 SCC 569, delay and laches cannot be raised in a case of a continuing cause of action or if the circumstances shock the judicial conscience of the court. The condition of 8CA 6351/2024 delay is a matter of judicial discretion, which must be exercised judiciously and reasonably in the facts and circumstances of the case. As held by this Court, it would depend upon the breach of fundamental rights, and the remedy claimed, and when and how the delay arose. There is no period of limitation prescribed for the courts to exercise their constitutional jurisdiction to do substantial justice. 26 In a case where the demand for justice is so compelling, a constitutional court would exercise its jurisdiction with a view to promote justice, and not defeat it. [See: P.S.

--- JUDGMENT 499 ---
Sadasivaswamy v. State of T.N., (1975) 1 SCC 152] 27 In Tukaram Kana Joshi v. MIDC reported in (2013) 1 SCC 353, this Court while dealing with a similar fact situation, held as follows: “11. There are authorities which state that delay and laches extinguish the right to put forth a claim. Most of these authorities pertain to service jurisprudence, grant of compensation for a wrong done to them decades ago, recovery of statutory dues, claim for educational facilities and other categories of similar cases, etc. Though, it is true that there are a few authorities that lay down that delay and laches debar a citizen from seeking remedy, even if his fundamental right has been violated, under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution, the case at hand deals with a different scenario altogether. The functionaries of the State took over possession of the land belonging to the appellants without any sanction of law . The appellants had asked repeatedly for grant of the benefit of compensation. The State must either comply with the procedure laid down for acquisition, or requisition, or any other permissible statutory mode.” (Emphasis supplied) 9CA 6351/2024 28 In such circumstances referred to above, we are of the view that we should set aside the impugned order passed by the High Court and remit the matter for fresh consideration. 29 In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for fresh consideration. Letters Patent Appeal No 997 of 2019 is restored to its original file. The High Court shall hear both the sides and pass an appropriate order in accordance with what has been observed by this Court in this order. We request the High Court to decide the matter within a period of two months from today. 30 Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. ..…....…........……………….…........J.

--- JUDGMENT 500 ---
1. This appeal is directed against the order of the High Court of Manipur at Imphal1 dated 14.03.2023, whereby leave has been granted to the election petitioner (the first respondent herein) to file a replication in answer to the new facts asserted in the written statement filed by the returned candidate (the appellant herein). 1 High Court Civil Appeal No. of 2024 Page 1 of 30Factual Matrix 2. The first respondent filed an election petition seeking a declaration that the election of the returned candidate, namely, the appellant herein, is null and void under: (a) Section 100(1) (d) (i) (ii) and (iv); and (b) Section 100 (1) (b) of the Representation of Peoples Act, 19512. In addition, thereto, a prayer was made to declare the election petitioner as duly elected from the concerned legislative constituency3 of 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly. 3. In the election petition, it was alleged, inter alia, that the returned candidate had failed to make necessary disclosures in the nomination paper/the affidavit (i.e., Form 26) which had a material bearing on the election result. In support of that allegation, particulars of such non-disclosure / incorrect disclosure were detailed in the election petition. These allegations, however, were not only traversed in the written statement filed by the returned candidate (i.e. the appellant herein) but additional facts were also laid out 2 1951 Act 3 4- Kshetrigao Assembly Constituency. Civil Appeal No. of 2024 Page 2 of 30therein. As a result, the election petitioner filed an application seeking leave to file a replication, which came to be allowed by the impugned order of the High Court. Impugned Order 4. The High Court vide impugned order allowed the application seeking leave to file subsequent pleading while, inter alia, observing as follows: “15. The petitioner has filed the election petition, inter alia, on the ground that the first respondent has failed to disclose the details – status of his bank accounts with respective balances in Form 26. The first respondent has also failed to disclose the details of liability and also the car bearing DL4CNB4776 owned by him in Form 26. 16. On a reading of the election petition, it is seen that the petitioner has also taken other grounds. However, in reply to the ground for non-disclosure of the account details, the first respondent replied in his written statement that the said accounts opened for establishment of Self Help Group, namely, Panthoibi SHG, Yaiphabi SHG. Paragraphs 12 and 17 of the written statement speak about the opening of the bank accounts and also stated that some of the accounts have NIL balance and were lying in a dormant condition at the time of filing nomination papers. Therefore, there is no necessity to disclose the same in Form 26. The opening of the accounts for establishment of Self Help Groups, according to the petitioner, is new plea and the petitioner has to controvert the said facts by clarifying the relation between the accounts and Self Help Groups. 17. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the accounts are joint accounts which actually belonged to the first respondent and others and nowhere mentioned that these accounts are the social or charitable account. The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner appears to merit consideration.

